::: {.contentWrapper}
::: {.content}
![european flag](./../../../../images/eclogo.jpg)EUROPEAN COMMISSION

Brussels, 14.7.2021

COM(2021) 557 final

2021/0218(COD)

Proposal for a

DIRECTIVE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL

amending Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the
Council,  Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of
the Council and Directive 98/70/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council  as regards the promotion of energy from renewable sources, and
repealing Council Directive (EU) 2015/652

{SEC(2021) 657 final} - {SWD(2021) 620 final} - {SWD(2021) 621 final} -
{SWD(2021) 622 final}

::: {.pageBreak}
\
:::
:::

::: {.content}
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM

[1.]{.num}CONTEXT OF THE PROPOSAL

[•]{.num}Reasons for and objectives of the proposal

The European Green Deal (EGD) establishes the objective of becoming
climate neutral in 2050 in a manner that contributes to the European
economy, growth and jobs. This objective requires a greenhouse as
emissions reduction of 55% by 2030 as confirmed by the European Council
in December 2020. This in turn requires significantly higher shares of
renewable energy sources in an integrated energy system. The current EU
target of at least 32% renewable energy by 2030, set in the Renewable
Energy Directive (REDII), is not sufficient and needs to be increased to
38-40%, according to the Climate Target Plan (CTP). At the same time,
new accompanying measures in different sectors in line with the Energy
System Integration, the Hydrogen, the Offshore Renewable Energy and the
Biodiversity Strategies are required to achieve this increased target.

The overall objectives of the revision of REDII are to achieve an
increase in the use of energy from renewable sources by 2030, to foster
better energy system integration and to contribute to climate and
environmental objectives including the protection of biodiversity,
thereby addressing the intergenerational concerns associated with global
warming and biodiversity loss. This revision of REDII is essential to
achieve the increased climate target as well as to protect our
environment and health, reduce our energy dependency, and contribute to
the EU's technological and industrial leadership along with the creation
of jobs and economic growth.

[•]{.num}Consistency with existing policy provisions in the policy area

REDII is the main EU instrument dealing with the promotion of energy
from renewable sources. The review of REDII does not stand alone. It is
part of a broader exercise that affects other energy and climate
legislation and policy initiatives, as announced in the EGD roadmap, and
in the Commission work programme for 2021 under the title "Fit for 55
package". The proposal for the revision of REDII is consistent with:

[i.]{.num}The EU Emission Trading Scheme, as carbon pricing works best
hand in hand with regulatory measures.

[ii.]{.num}The Energy Efficiency Directive, which contributes to the
efficient use of renewable energy in end-use sectors.

[iii.]{.num}The Energy Performance of Buildings Directive, which ensures
appropriate energy performance requirements related to renewable energy.

[iv.]{.num}The Ecodesign Directive, incentivising consumers to move away
from fossil fuel appliances.

[v.]{.num}The Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry Regulation, which
provides incentives for economic operators to deploy emission-absorbing
projects that can be a source of biomass.

[vi.]{.num}The Energy Taxation Directive, which ensures that prices
promote sustainable practices and incentivises production and use.

[vii.]{.num}The Effort Sharing legislation, which establishes binding
greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions for sectors covered by REDII
such as transport, buildings, agriculture and waste.

[viii.]{.num}The Fuel Quality Directive, which supports the use of
renewable and low-carbon fuels in transport.

[ix.]{.num}The Alternative Fuel Infrastructure Directive, which supports
the deployment of alternative fuels infrastructure, including recharging
points for electric vehicles and refuelling points for natural gas and
hydrogen.

[x.]{.num}The proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and
of the Council on guidelines for trans-European energy infrastructure
and repealing Regulation (EU) No 347/2013[ [1](#footnote2){#footnoteref2
.footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference}.

[2.]{.num}LEGAL BASIS, SUBSIDIARITY AND PROPORTIONALITY

[•]{.num}Legal basis
:::

::: {.content}
The proposal is based primarily on Article 194(2) of the Treaty on the
Functioning of the European Union[ [2](#footnote3){#footnoteref3
.footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference} (TFEU), which provides the legal
basis for proposing measures to develop new and renewable forms of
energy, one of the goals of the Union's energy policy, set out in
Article 194(1)(c) TFEU. REDII, which will be amended by this proposal,
was also adopted under Article 194(2) TFEU in 2018. Article 114 TFEU,
the internal market legal base, is added in order to amend Directive
98/70/EC on fuel quality, which is based on that Article.

[•]{.num}Subsidiarity (for non-exclusive competence)

The need for EU action

A cost-efficient accelerated development of sustainable renewable energy
within a more integrated energy system cannot be sufficiently achieved
by Member States alone. An EU approach is needed to provide the right
incentives to Member States with different levels of ambition to
accelerate, in a coordinated way, the energy transition from the
traditional fossil fuel based energy system towards a more integrated
and more energy-efficient energy system based on renewables-based
generation. Taking into account the different energy policies and
priorities among Member States, action at EU level is more likely to
achieve the required increased deployment of renewables than national or
local action alone.

EU added value

EU action on renewable energy brings added value because it is more
efficient and effective than individual Member States' actions, avoiding
a fragmented approach by addressing the transition of the European
energy system in a coordinated way. It ensures net reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions and pollution, protects biodiversity, harnesses
the benefits of the internal market, fully exploits the advantages of
economies of scale and technological cooperation in Europe, and it gives
investors certainty in an EU-wide regulatory framework. The achievement
of an increased share of renewable energy in final EU energy consumption
depends on national contributions from each Member State. These will be
more ambitious and cost-effective if driven by an agreed common legal
and policy framework.

[•]{.num}Proportionality

::: {.border}
The preferred package of policy options is considered proportionate and
builds to the extent possible on current policy design. Several options
set a target or a benchmark to be achieved, but leave the means to
achieve those targets up to the Member States. The balance between
obligations and the flexibility left to the Member States on how to
achieve the objectives is considered appropriate given the imperative of
achieving climate neutrality (see sections 3.3 and 7.5 of the Impact
Assessment accompanying this proposal, SWD (2021) XXX).
:::

[•]{.num}Choice of the instrument

::: {.border}
This proposal is for an amending Directive. Given its relatively recent
adoption, this review of REDII is limited to what is considered
necessary to contribute in a cost-effective way to the Union's 2030
climate ambition, and is not a full revision of the Directive, so a
recast is not considered appropriate.
:::

[3.]{.num}RESULTS OF EX-POST EVALUATIONS, STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS AND
IMPACT ASSESSMENTS

[•]{.num}Stakeholder consultations

Consultation methods, main sectors targeted and general profile of
respondents

The Inception Impact Assessment (Roadmap) was published for feedback
from 3 August to 21 September 2020 and 374 replies were received, from
stakeholders from 21 Member States and 7 non-EU countries. Most
responses came from companies or business associations, followed by
NGOs, anonymous and citizens. In addition, the Commission launched an
online public consultation (OPC) on 17 November 2020 for 12 weeks, in
line with the Commission Better Regulation rules. It contains multiple
choice and open questions covering a wide range of issues on the
revision of REDII. 39,046 replies were received in total. Stakeholder
views were also gathered in two workshops, the first one was held on 11
December 2020 (close to 400 participants) and the second one was on 22
March 2021 (close to 1000 participants).

Summary of stakeholder views

The majority (80%) of replies to the OPC showed a preference for an
increased RES target in line with the CTP (43%) or higher (37%). 61%
favoured a binding target both at EU and national level. Transport and
heating and cooling were the two most popular sectors where additional
efforts were considered necessary, with a majority supporting increased
targets for both sectors at least at the level of the CTP. A coordinated
response of more than 38,000 participants requested removing biomass
from the list of renewable resources and limiting the use for bioenergy
to locally available waste and residues, whereas representatives from
trade unions, business and a majority of public authorities preferred
not changing the current sustainability criteria for biomass.

The views of the stakeholders as expressed in the OPC and during the
workshops were taken into account when elaborating the various policy
options on the respective policy areas in the impact assessment.

::: {.border}
• [   ]{.tab}Collection and use of expertise
:::

A study from external contractors Trinomics provided technical support
for renewables policy development and implementation. The impact
assessment carried out for the CTP and the Commission's assessment of
the Member States' Natonal Energy and Climate Plans (NECPs) and the 2020
Renewable Energy Progress Report also formed part of the evidence base.

In addition the following studies also fed into the impact assessment:
:::

::: {.content}
[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Technical support for renewables policy
development and implementation: enhanced efficiency through sector
integration

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Renewable Cooling under the Revised Renewable
Energy Directive

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Renewable Space Heating under the Revised
Renewable Energy Directive

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Policy support for heating and cooling
decarbonisation

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Regulatory and market conditions of District
Heating and Cooling

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Potentials and levels for the electrification
of space heating in buildings

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Renewable Heating and Cooling Pathways,
Measures and Milestones for the implementation of the recast Renewable
Energy Directive and full decarbonisation by 2050

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Technical assistance to assess the potential of
renewable liquid and gaseous transport fuels of non-biological origin
(RFNBOs) as well as recycled carbon fuels (RCFs), to establish a
methodology to determine the share of renewable energy from RFNBOs as
well as to develop a framework on additionality in the transport sector

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Simplification of Permission and Administrative
Procedures for RES Installations

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Establishing technical requirements &
facilitating the standardisation process for guarantees of origin on the
basis of Directive(EU) 2018/2001

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Technical assistance for assessing options to
establish an EU-wide green label with a view to promote the use of
renewable energy coming from new installations

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Assessment of the potential for new feedstocks
for the production of advanced biofuels (ENER C1 2019-412)

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Support for the implementation of the
provisions on ILUC set out in the Renewable Energy Directive
(ENER/C2/2018-462)

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}The use of woody biomass for energy production
in the EU (JRC report, 01/2021)

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Scoping study setting technical requirements
and options for a Union Database for tracing liquid and gaseous
transport fuels

Impact assessment

The Impact Assessment (IA) accompanying the Proposal was elaborated
based on modelling, stakeholder input and input from the Interservice
Group. The report was submitted to the Regulatory Scrutiny Board on the
10 of March 2021. On 19 April 2021, the Regulatory Scrutiny Board
delivered its first opinion on the Impact Assessment, and following the
re-submission of the IA, the second was delivered on 19 May.

Against this background, the impact assessment analysed the various
options through which a revision of the REDII could effectively and
efficiently contribute to the delivery of the updated target as part of
a wider "Fit for 55" policy package.

Regarding the overall renewable energy target level, option 0 (no
change) would provide no means of ensuring that the EU-wide renewable
energy target is deployed to reach at least 38-40% share in final energy
consumption. Option 2 (a higher target than 40%) would potentially lead
to overshooting the climate target and to a lack of coherence with other
EU legislative instruments. Hence, option 1 (a minimum target in the
range of 38-40%) has no drawbacks and is the thus the preferred and
effective option. Regarding the nature of the target, although option 1
(national binding targets) would imply the most effective achievement of
an increased RES share, this would create subsidiarity issues. The
current Energy Union Governance process is an important foundation for
achieving the renewables target. The first iteration of the review
process of the national plans, completed in 2020, proved to be effective
in that the national contributions were collectively sufficiently
ambitious to reach the binding Union 2030 RES target. Under the
Governance Regulation the Member States must submit their draft updates
to their NECPs by June 2023, and can already show how they are planning
to reach the higher target 2030 target. Given the effective nature and
architecture of the current system, option 0 (maintaining the EU binding
target and national voluntary contributions) is the preferred option.

Regarding heating & cooling, option 1 (non-regulatory measures) will not
trigger Member States to increase efforts in the RES heating and cooling
sector to at least 1.1% annual average percentage point (pp).
Translating the EU RES heating and cooling figure from the CTP into a
binding uniform increased annual average share across Member States
equally as per option 3b is not considered proportionate, although it is
the most effective. The level of renewables needed in 2030 could also be
set as a target as proposed in option 3c but that would depart from the
current model and could disrupt the already on-going implementation
efforts, although it would have the added benefit of setting the
end-goal in 2030 clearly. Option 3a combined with sector and EU RES
buildings and industry benchmarks of appropriate design (option 3d)
would be effective in providing the right mix of drivers for integrating
further these sectors into the energy system. This option 3a would set a
minimum flat rate of RES growth by making the current indicative annual
increase target of 1.1 p.p. as the minimum required effort and
complement it with Member State specific "top-ups" redistributing the
additional efforts to the desired level of renewables in 2030 among
Member States based on GDP and cost. The additional Member States
specific increase rates could provide a means of assessing the relative
level of ambition of each Member States in the heating and cooling
sector but also as a potential gap filler measure to close the gap, if
other sectors than heating and cooling would fail to deliver the 38-40%
overall RES target. The option of a benchmark for the use of renewable
energy in the building sector is also considered here.
:::

::: {.content}
The extended list of measures as per option 2a allows flexibility at
national level and ensures proportionality and gives the Member States a
toolbox to choose from. The design respects national and local
diversities in conditions and starting points, and provide a clear
framework for actors at all levels (national, regional, local) and of
all types (from utilities and companies to municipalities to citizen
consumers/prosumers).

Regarding district heating & cooling, option 3c (increasing the
indicative 1% annual increase percentage-point target to CTP levels of
2.1% without changing its nature) would steer district heating
developments towards integrating more renewable energy in coherence with
the CTP and carbon-neutrality goals, while respecting the wide variety
of situations in Member States. Option 3b (indicative EU renewable
target for renewables' share in district heating & cooling could give
similar benefits as option 3c but departs from the current provisions
and could be disruptive for already ongoing implementation. Option 3d
(increasing the 1% percentagepoint increase target and making it
binding) would be the most effective target design, but is too stringent
and leaves less room for Member States. Option 3a (no changes) would
make it possible for district heating to indefinitely continue with the
fossil fuels and thus is not coherent with the review's objectives.
Option 2 (list of measures) can be self-standing or complementary, as it
gives a clearer enabling framework to transform district heating and
cooling, make it into an enabler of renewable energy supply in buildings
and to become a key heat decarbonisation instrument, while enhancing
energy sector integration in national and EU energy systems. Combining
option 2 on measures with the target design in option 3c is the
preferred option to ensure that district heating and cooling aligns with
the EGD and becomes an enabler to deliver on the CTP and energy system
integration goals. Together with the options on overall heating and
cooling and buildings, this option would also set an enabling framework
to develop and expand modern renewable based smart district heating and
cooling systems.

Regarding mainstreaming renewable electricity, option 1.1 (availability
of near-real-time information on the renewable share of electricity
supplied by the grid) would provide effective market incentivising
signals that relate directly to renewable penetration and carbon
reduction, without any administrative burden and in coherence with
existing legislation. Option 1.2 (information on the RES-share and GHG
emission profile would have some positive effects on consumer
information, however it would otherwise bring limited added value.
Options 2.1-2.3 cover different aspects of optimising the intelligent
charging infrastructure, with varying levels of positive contribution to
overall implementation costs and benefits to the economy. In order to
provide flexibility to Member States, implementation based on national
assessment was in each case selected as the preferred solution revolving
around smart charging functionality, including bidirectional charging
and deployment of additional smart charging points (2.1B, 2.2B and 2.3).
Options 3.1-3.3 address various obstacles in the aggregation and
mobility service provision market which hinder competition. Option 3.1
(ensuring that the treatment of electricity storage systems or devices
by network and market operators is not discriminatory or
disproportionate irrespective of their size (small-scale vs large-scale)
or whether they are stationary or mobile, so that they are able to
competitively offer flexibility and balancing services) is a no-regrets
option. Option 3.2 (independent aggregators and mobility service
providers[ to have access]{.normaltextrun} to basic battery information,
such as state-of-health and state-of-charge) is necessary in setting a
level playing field and its early implementation would bring positive
long term effects in the availability, quality and cost of services
provided to domestic battery owners and electric vehicle (EV) users.
Option 3.3 (ensure open access to all publicly accessible charging
infrastructure) is expected to become increasingly beneficial with the
proliferation of EVs.

Of the options considered regarding the increase of renewable energy in
the transport sector, a combination of option 1B (in addition to the
increase of the target and the sub-target for advanced biofuels a
dedicated sub-target for renewable fuels of non-biological origin is
introduced) with options 2A (energy-based obligation fuel suppliers), 2C
(the choice between the approaches described under 2A and 2B
(emissions-based obligation fuel suppliers) is left to the Member States
or 2D (emissions-based obligation fuel suppliers but operators are
required to achieve minimum shares for advanced biofuels and renewable
fuels of non-biological origin) would perform the best overall. While
all options apart from option 1 deliver on the needed level of ambition,
there are substantial differences. The energy-based options may have the
advantage to promote the development and production of innovative
renewable and recycled carbon fuels as they provide the most predictable
and stable policy framework for investments into such technologies. The
GHG-intensity based options can stimulate supply chain improvements and
technology efficiency in renewable and low carbon fuels, where costs of
production are higher and would have the advantage of ensuring
consistency with the approach chosen under the Fuel Quality Directive.
This, however, would require applying changes to the methodology applied
to determine the GHG emission intensity.

Promoting the use of renewable fuels of non-biological origin is fully
in line with the Energy System Integration Strategy and the Hydrogen
Strategy as well as the CTP especially if considering the post-2030
perspective. This is in particular valid for option 1 (extension of the
scope of accounting of RFNBOs beyond transport and improvement of the
consistency of accounting of RFNBOs) and option 3 (creation of specific
sub-targets for RFNBOs in hard-to-decarbonise sectors). Specific but
realistic sub-targets for RFNBOs for the transport and industry sectors
in 2030 would be a first step for their larger scale development after
2030.

Regarding the certification of renewable and low carbon fuels, option 1a
(adjustment of the scope and content of the current certification system
to include all fuels covered by REDII including recycled carbon fuels)
and option 2A (further development of the existing system of guarantees
of origin as an alternative certification system) were assessed. Option
1a was considered to have good potential to strengthen the existing
system, with the certification of low-carbon fuels to be addressed in a
separate legislative proposal such as the Hydrogen and Decarbonised Gas
Market Package. IT development choices will be subject to pre-approval
by the European Commission Information Technology and Cybersecurity
Board.

Regarding the options to ensure bioenergy sustainability, option 1
(non-regulatory measures) would facilitate the implementation of the
REDII sustainability criteria, but would not include additional
safeguards to address the identified risks. Option 2 (targeted
strengthening of the current EU bioenergy sustainability criteria) would
provide the most direct safeguard against the risks of production of
forest biomass in high biodiversity areas. It would also introduce
additional safeguards promoting optimal lifecycle GHG emissions saving
and avoiding new inefficient biomass use in the power sector. Option 3
(regulation of small installations) would further add to the
effectiveness of option 2 by regulating a larger amount of biomass use
for energy in the EU. It would also help improve public monitoring of
biomass production and use. Building on the preferred options 2, 3 and
4.2 (requiring Member States to design their support schemes for biomass
fuels in a way to minimise market distortions in the raw materials
market, with the aim to minimise the use of high quality roundwood),
would contribute to minimising the use of whole trees for energy
production as set out in the EU Biodiversity Strategy.

In addition to the core objectives of the revision of REDII to address
the insufficient ambition in a 2030 and 2050 perspective, to address the
insufficient system integration, and to update bioenergy sustainability
provisions, a limited number of additional "flanking" or enabling
measures could contribute to the cost-efficient deployment of
renewables.

Regarding Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs), option 1 (guidelines) will
provide additional guidance to Member States without increasing
administrative burden, although the effectiveness will depend on the
uptake of these guidelines. Option 2 (financial support for the use of
PPAs for small and medium-sized enterprises) will have a positive
benefit for the uptake of renewables and the European economy. Option 3
(strengthening of regulatory measures on PPAs) would place additional
burden upon Member States to remove any undue barriers, but could
provide additional certainty for producers and consumers of renewable
electricity. Options 1 and 2 are considered the preferred combination.

Regarding cross-border cooperation, option 1 (updated Commission
guidance) would, by itself, not be very effective whereas option 2
(obligation for Member States to test cross-border cooperation within
the next 3 years) has a moderate effectiveness. Although option 3
(mandatory partial opening of support schemes) and option 4 (enhanced
use of the Union renewable energy financing mechanism) would be highly
effective, option 2 is expected to be more politically acceptable and
thus the preferred option.

Regarding the promotion of offshore energy, given the binding nature of
option 1 (joint planning) it would be very effective to ensure target
setting and implementation per sea basin. Option 2 (introduction of
single contact points for the permitting per sea basin) can be expected
to have good effectiveness of facilitating permitting of cross-border
offshore renewables projects. A combination of both options is
preferred.

Regarding industry, option 0 (no changes) is not expected to increase
the share of renewable energy consumption in the industry sector,
creating serious concerns regarding the objective to reduce greenhouse
gas emission reductions by 2030, and to achieve climate neutrality in
2050. Option 1 (introduction of use of renewable energy in the audits
required in the EED) would provide an effective means to introduce
industrial actors to existing cost-effective solutions to switch to
renewable energy, without any administrative burden and in coherence
with existing legislation. Option 2 (labelling for industrial products
in certain sectors claimed to be made from renewable energy) provides an
effective means to create a uniform and coherent market for those
companies that are placing products and services produced from renewable
energy on the market. Any mandatory labelling would need to be carefully
designed to ensure compatibility with WTO rules. Options 1 and 2 would
be complementary and the most effective options, combined with an
indicative target for the use of renewable energy in industry.

Overall the policy options have positive economic, environmental and
societal benefits. A more secure EU energy system, less dependent on
imports, would be achieved by the increase in renewable energy, in
particular from offshore. The revision of REDII is likely to have
positive impacts on economic growth and investments, by creating quality
jobs, and reducing fossil fuel imports and energy costs for consumers
and business. Many of the policy options are projected to create jobs,
in line with the envisaged green digital recovery. Positive employment
effects are expected, especially in sectors linked to renewable energy,
with an increase in employment and skills in the construction and energy
supply sectors and shift in employment between the sectors. Per euro of
expenditure, renewable energy creates nearly 70 per cent more jobs than
fossil fuels spending and solar PV creates more than twice the number of
jobs per unit of electricity generation compared to coal or natural gas.
Greater use of energy from sustainable renewable sources, including
renewable hydrogen, would result in reduced GHG emissions. Replacing
fossil fuels will also reduce air pollutants and have a beneficial
impact on health. Renewable-based electrification of road transport
would have positive impacts in particular on urban air pollution,
whereas electrification of, for example, heating in buildings, would
contribute substantially to reducing the GHG and other air pollutant
emissions from the European building stock, which today relies heavily
on fossil fuels. Air quality in cities will be improved by among others
renewable heating, especially district heating in cities. Positive
biodiversity impacts will follow from stronger sustainability criteria
for bioenergy. It may reduce import from outside the EU of biomass
fuels, as third countries choose not to comply with them and redirect
their export away from the EU.

The revision of the REDII will mainly entail practical implications for
Member States public administrations given the need to comply with
higher (binding) targets which need to be worked towards to and
monitored accordingly. Other actions required from the public
administration include promotion and facilitation of the uptake of
renewable energy across multiple carriers.

• [   ]{.tab}Regulatory fitness and simplification

A regulatory fitness programme (REFIT) evaluation of the Renewable
Energy Directive was carried out between 2014 and 2016. Given the
relatively recent adoption of REDII, the proposed revision is limited to
what is considered necessary to contribute in a cost-effective way to
the Union's 2030 climate ambition, and is not a full revision of the
Directive. The Impact Assessment identified possibilities for
simplification of legislation and reduction of regulatory costs.

::: {.border}
No changes in the compliance monitoring regime are foreseen.

Increasing renewable energy use in heating and cooling and in buildings
will require building works/renovation, leading to an increase in
employment in the sector. Up to 95% of construction, architecture and
civil engineering firms are small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs),
so there is a likely positive economic effect on SMEs. Guidance and
financial support on power purchase agreements will help SMEs who do not
have the resources to deal with complex contracts. More stringent forest
biomass criteria may create increased administrative costs and burden
for small and medium-sized economic operators.

To ensure fair competition in the single market the same rules should
apply to all economic operators. As such, the proposal does not exempt
SMEs or micro-enterprises except for providing simplified verification
mechanisms for small energy producing installations. However, the
envisaged economic impacts also likely to benefit SMEs as most of the
value chain of deploying renewable energy technology, in particular
solar PV, is operated by SMEs.

Fundamental rights
:::
:::

::: {.content}
::: {.border}
In terms of consistency with the Charter for fundamental rights, the
overarching aim of this review is to increase the use of renewable
energy and reduce GHG emissions, and this is entirely in line with
Article 37 of the Charter under which a high level of environmental
protection and the improvement of the quality of the environment must be
integrated into the policies of the Union and ensured in accordance with
the principle of sustainable development.
:::

4. [   ]{.tab}BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS

::: {.border}
This proposal amends an existing Directive on the use of renewable
energy, and the administrative impact and costs are therefore estimated
to be moderate, as most of the necessary structures and rules are in
place. The proposal does not entail any additional costs for the EU
budget.
:::

[5.]{.num}OTHER ELEMENTS

[•]{.num}Implementation plans and monitoring, evaluation and reporting
arrangements

::: {.border}
After the adoption of this amending Directive by the co-legislators,
during the transposition period, the Commission will undertake the
following actions to facilitate its transposition:
:::

[--]{.num}Drafting of a correlation table that serves as transposition
check-list for both Member States and the Commission.

[--]{.num}Organisation of meetings with Member States' experts in charge
of transposing the different parts of the Directive to discuss how to
transpose them and solve doubts, either in the context of the Concerted
Action for Renewable Energy Sources (CA-RES) or in a committee format.

[--]{.num}Availability for bilateral meetings and calls with Member
States in case of specific question on the transposition of the
Directive.

::: {.border}
After the transposition deadline, the Commission will carry out a
comprehensive assessment of whether Member States have completely and
correctly transposed the Directive.
:::

Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 on the Governance of the Energy Union and
Climate Action established an integrated energy and climate planning,
monitoring and reporting framework, to monitor progress towards the
climate and energy targets in line with the transparency requirements of
the Paris Agreement. Member States had to submit to the Commission their
integrated national energy and climate plans by the end of 2019,
covering the five dimensions of the Energy Union for the period
2021-2030. From 2023, Member States must report biennially on the
progress made in implementing the plans and in addition, by 30 June 2023
they must notify the Commission of their draft updates of the plans,
with the final updates due on 30 June 2024. This update, due in 2024,
would cover planning obligations related to any new targets agreed in
the revision of REDII. Any additional planning and reporting
requirements set in this proposal will not create a new planning and
reporting system, but would be subject to the existing planning and
reporting framework under Regulation (EU) 2018/1999. The future revision
of the Governance Regulation would allow a consolidation of these
reporting requirements.

[•]{.num}Explanatory documents (for directives)

Following the ruling of the European Court of Justice in Commission vs
Belgium (case C-543/17), Member States must accompany their
notifications of national transposition measures with sufficiently clear
and precise information, indicating which provisions of national law
transpose which provisions of a directive. This must be provided for
each obligation, not only at "article level". If Member States comply
with this obligation, they would not need, in principle, to send
explanatory documents on the transposition to the Commission.

[•]{.num}Detailed explanation of the specific provisions of the proposal

::: {.border}
The main provisions which substantially change Directive (EC) 2018/2001
or add new elements are the following:

Article 1(1) amends Article 2 REDII by modifying the definition of
renewable fuels of non-biological origin and default value, and adding
new definitions of quality roundwood, renewable fuels, bidding zone,
smart metering system, recharging point, market participant, electricity
market, domestic battery, electric vehicle battery, industrial battery,
state of health, state of charge, power set point, smart charging,
regulatory authority, bidirectional charging, normal power recharging
point, industry, non-energy purposes, plantation forest and planted
forest.

Article 1(2) amends Article 3(1) REDII with the updated 2030 EU target
of at least a 40% share of energy from renewable sources in the Union's
gross final consumption of energy in 2030. It also modifies Article 3(3)
to strengthen the obligation to minimise the risks of unnecessary market
distortions resulting from support schemes and to avoid supporting
certain raw materials for energy production in line with the cascading
principle. It also introduces the obligation to phase out, with some
exceptions, support for electricity production from biomass from 2026.
Furthermore, Article 1(2) adds a new paragraph on electrification, to
help Member States reach their national contributions.

Article 1(3) amends Article 7 REDII with the updated calculation method
of the share of energy from renewable energy sources so that (i) energy
from renewable fuels of non-biological origin must be accounted in the
sector in which it is consumed (electricity, heating and cooling or
transport), and (ii) the renewable electricity used to produce renewable
fuels of non-biological origin is not included in the calculation of the
gross final consumption of electricity from renewable sources in the
Member State.
:::

Article 1(4) amends Article 9(1) REDII with an additional paragraph on
the Member States' obligation to have a cross border pilot project
within 3 years and it amends Article 9(7) REDII with an additional
paragraph on joint offshore energy planning per sea basin, under which
Member States must jointly define and agree to cooperate on the amount
of offshore renewable generation to be deployed within each sea basin by
2050, with intermediate steps in 2030 and 2040.
:::

::: {.content}
Article 1(5) amends Article 15 REDII by deleting paragraphs 4 to 7
regarding buildings, which have been moved to a new Article (15a),
updating the references to standards, strengthening the provision on
renewables power purchase agreements, and adding a clause to review the
administrative procedures one year after the entry into force of this
amending Directive.

Article 1(6) inserts a new Article 15a on mainstreaming renewable energy
and enabling measures to mainstream heating & cooling in buildings. This
new Article includes a new indicative Union target of renewables in
buildings by 2030 of 49% and a reference to the new definition of
'efficient district heating and cooling' that will be added to the
recast Energy Efficiency Directive, which is one of the ways the minimum
level of RES in new buildings and buildings undergoing major renovation
can be satisfied. It adjusts the text of the paragraphs on buildings of
Article 15 REDII to link them to the achievement of the indicative RES
targets and to promote the switch from fossil fuel heating systems to
RES, as well as to be coherent with the Energy Performance of Buildings
Directive.

Article 1(7) amends Article 18(3) REDII with adjusted paragraphs on the
qualification and certification requirements of installers to deal with
the fact that there is a shortage of installers of renewable heating
systems, which is a 'brake' on phasing out fossil fuel systems. It also
deletes list of specific types of renewable heating technologies and
replaces it by a generic reference to RES heating systems. It amends
Article 18(4) REDII by obliging Member States to put in place measures
to support participation in training programmes. The previous
possibility for Member States to make the list of qualified installers
public becomes a requirement.

Article 1(8) amends Article 19(2) and (8) REDII to remove Member States'
ability not to issue guarantees of origin to a producer that receives
financial support, linking to the changes related to power purchase
agreements in Article 15.

Article 1(9) amends Article 20(3) REDII with a new and additional
paragraph to enhance energy system integration between DHC systems and
other energy networks, by requiring Member States, where relevant, to
develop efficient DHC to promote heating and cooling from RES.

Article 1(10) inserts a new Article 20a in REDII facilitating system
integration of renewable electricity by the following measures:

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}TSO and DSOs are required to make available
information on the share of RES and the GHG content of the electricity
they supply, in order to increase transparency and give more information
to electricity market players, aggregators, consumers and end-users;

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Battery manufacturers must enable access to
information on battery capacity, state of health, state of charge and
power set point, to battery owners as well as third parties acting on
their behalf;

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Member States shall ensure smart charging
capability for non-publicly accessible normal power recharging points,
due to their relevance to energy system integration;

[[·]{.num}]{.list-symbol}Member States shall ensure that regulatory
provisions concerning the use of storage and balancing assets do not
discriminate against participation of small and/or mobile storage
systems in the flexibility, balancing and storage services market.

Article 1(11) inserts a new Article 22a in REDII on mainstreaming
renewable energy in industry with an indicative target of an annual
average increase of renewable energy of 1.1 percentage points and a
binding target of 50 percent for renewable fuels of non-biological
origin used as feedstock or as an energy carrier. It also introduces a
requirement that the labelling of green industrial products indicates
the percentage of renewable energy used following a common EU-wide
methodology.

Article 1(12) amends Article 23(1) REDII so that the 1.1 ppt annual
increase in heating and cooling becomes a binding baseline and adds an
additional paragraph obliging the Member States to carry out an
assessment of their potential of energy from renewable sources and of
the use of waste heat and cold in the heating and cooling sector. It
also amends Article 23(4) REDII with an extended menu of measures to
help them implement the heating and cooling target. It also strengthens
this paragraph so that Member States must ensure, rather than aim to
ensure, the accessibility of measures to all consumers, in particular
those in low-income or vulnerable households, who would not otherwise
possess sufficient up-front capital to benefit.

Article 1(13) amends Article 24(1) REDII with an updated paragraph on
information of the renewable energy share in district heating and
cooling systems. Article 1(13) amends Article 24(4) REDII with an
updated paragraph on increased target share, from 1 ppt to 2.1 ppt of
energy from renewable sources and from waste heat and cold in district
heating and cooling and a new paragraph is added expanding third party
access to apply to district heating or cooling systems above 25 MWth
where this makes sense. Article 1(13) amends Article 24(5) REDII with an
updated paragraph adding a reference to the new definition of efficient
district heating (to be added to the recast Energy Efficiency Directive)
and requiring Member States to put in place a mechanism to deal with
unjustified refusals of third party access. Article 24(6) REDII is
amended with a new paragraph on a framework to facilitate coordination
among actors having a role in the use of waste heat and cold. Article
1(13) amends Article 24(8) REDII with updated paragraphs requiring DSOs
to make an assessment every 4 years of the potential for district
heating or cooling systems to provide balancing and other system
services. Article 24(9) REDII is amended with an updated paragraph on
Member States' obligation to ensure that the rights of consumers and the
rules for operating district heating and cooling systems in accordance
with the revised rules, that they are clearly defined, publicly
available and enforced by the competent authority. Article 24(10) REDII
is amended with an updated paragraph correcting the cross references and
adding the new definition of efficient district heating (to be added to
the recast Energy Efficiency Directive)

Article 1(14) amends Article 25(1) REDII by increasing the ambition
level of renewables in transport by setting a 13% greenhouse gas
intensity reduction target, increasing the subtarget for advanced
biofuels from at least 0.2 % in 2022 to 0.5% in 2025 and 2.2 % in 2030,
and introducing a 2.6% sub-target for RFNBOs. Article 1(14) also
introduces a credit mechanism to promote electromobility, under which
economic operators that supply renewable electricity to electric
vehicles via public charging stations will receive credits they can sell
to fuel suppliers who can use them to satisfy the fuel supplier
obligation.

::: {.border}
Article 1(15) amends Article 26 REDII to reflect the greenhouse gas
intensity target set in transport.

Article 1(16) amends Article 27(1) REDII by setting out rules to
calculate both the reduction of the greenhouse gas intensity of fuels
achieved by the use of renewables in transport and the targets for
advanced biofuels and biogas and renewable fuels of non-biological
origin. Article 1(16) deletes Article 27(2) REDII to remove the
multipliers associated to certain renewable fuels and to renewable
electricity used in transport. Article 1(16) amends Article 27(3) REDII
to delete the additionality framework for electricity in transport and
to make the provisions on the calculation of renewable fuels of
non-biological origin produced from electricity apply regardless of the
sector in which such fuels are consumed.
:::

Article 1(17) amends Article 28 by deleting the paragraphs on the Union
database, which is now regulated in Article 31(a), and by deleting the
empowerment in paragraph 5 to adopt a delegated act specifying the
methodology for assessing greenhouse gas emissions savings from
renewable fuels of non-biological origin and from recycled carbon fuels,
which is now regulated in Article 1(20).

Article 1(18) amends Article 29(1), (3), (4), (5) and (6) REDII with
updated paragraphs with targeted strengthening of the current
sustainability criteria by applying the existing land criteria (e.g.
no-go areas) for agricultural biomass also to forest biomass (including
primary, highly diverse forests and peatlands). Those strengthened
criteria are applied to small-scale biomass-based heat and power
installations below a total rated thermal capacity of 5 MW. Article
1(18) amends Article 29(10) REDII with an updated paragraph applying the
existing greenhouse gas saving thresholds for electricity, heating and
cooling production from biomass fuels to existing installations (not
only new installations). Article 1(18) adds further elements to Article
29(6) to minimise the negative impact of harvesting on soil quality and
biodiversity.

Article 1(19) inserts a new Article 29a on greenhouse gas emissions
saving criteria for renewable fuels of non-biological origin (RFNBOs)
and recycled carbon fuels, so that energy from RFNBOs can only be
counted towards the targets set in this Directive if its GHG emissions
savings are at least 70% and energy from recycled carbon fuels can only
be counted towards the transport target if its GHG emissions savings are
at least 70%.

Article 1(20) modifies Article 30 REDII to adjust it to the changes
introduced in Articles 29a and 31a. It also introduces a simplified
verification mechanism for installations of between 5 and 10MW.
:::

::: {.content}
Article 1(21) deletes paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of Article 31 REDII, which
regulated the possibility to use of regional cultivation values, in
order to better promote producers' individual efforts to reduce the
greenhouse gas emission intensity of raw materials

Article 1(22) inserts a new Article 31a, which regulates the Union
database, extending its scope so that it can cover fuels not only in the
transport sector. It will enable the tracing of liquid and gaseous
renewable fuels and recycled carbon fuels as well as their life-cycle
greenhouse gas emissions. The database is the monitoring and reporting
tool where fuel suppliers must enter the information necessary to verify
their compliance with the fuel suppliers' obligation in Article 25.

::: {.border}
Article 2 amends Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 in order to change the
Union-level binding target of at least 32% for the share of renewable
energy consumed in the Union in 2030 therein to 'the Union\'s binding
target for renewable energy in 2030 as referred to in Article 3 of
Directive (EU) 2018/2001'. It does not amend other key elements of
Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 such as the 15 % electricity interconnection
target which remains crucial for renewables integration.

Article 3 amends Directive 98/70/EC to avoid a duplication of regulatory
requirements with regards to transport fuel decarbonisation objectives
and align with Directive (EU) 2018/2001, among others regarding
obligations regarding the greenhouse gas emission reduction and the use
of biofuels.

Article 4 contains transitional provisions related to reporting
obligations under Directive 98/70/EC to ensure that the data collected
and reported in accordance with articles of Directive 98/70/EC, which
are deleted by Article 3(4) of this Directive, are submitted to the
Commission.

Article 5 contains the stipulations regarding transposition.

Article 6 repeals Council Directive (EU) 2015/652.

Article 7 concerns entry into force.
:::

2021/0218 (COD)

Proposal for a

DIRECTIVE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL

amending Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the
Council,  Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of
the Council and Directive 98/70/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council  as regards the promotion of energy from renewable sources, and
repealing Council Directive (EU) 2015/652

Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union,
and in particular Article 114 and 194(2) thereof,

Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission,

After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national
parliaments,

Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social
Committee[ [3](#footnote4){#footnoteref4 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference},

Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions[
[4](#footnote5){#footnoteref5 .footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference},

Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure,

Whereas:

[(1)]{.num}The European Green Deal[ [5](#footnote6){#footnoteref6
.footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference} establishes the objective of the
Union becoming climate neutral in 2050 in a manner that contributes to
the European economy, growth and job creation. That objective, and the
objective of a 55% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 as set
out in the 2030 Climate Target Plan[ [6](#footnote7){#footnoteref7
.footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference} that was endorsed both by the
European Parliament[ [7](#footnote8){#footnoteref8 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference} and by the European Council[
[8](#footnote9){#footnoteref9 .footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference},
requires an energy transition and significantly higher shares of
renewable energy sources in an integrated energy system.
:::

::: {.content}
[(2)]{.num}Renewable energy plays a fundamental role in delivering the
European Green Deal and for achieving climate neutrality by 2050, given
that the energy sector contributes over 75% of total greenhouse gas
emissions in the Union. By reducing those greenhouse gas emissions,
renewable energy also contributes to tackling environmental-related
challenges such as biodiversity loss.

[(3)]{.num}Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of
the Council[ [9](#footnote10){#footnoteref10 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference} sets a binding Union target to reach a share of at
least 32 % of energy from renewable sources in the Union\'s gross final
consumption of energy by 2030. Under the Climate Target Plan, the share
of renewable energy in gross final energy consumption would need to
increase to 40% by 2030 in order to achieve the Union's greenhouse gas
emissions reduction target[ [10](#footnote11){#footnoteref11
.footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference}. Therefore, the target set out in
Article 3 of that Directive needs to be increased.

[(4)]{.num}There is a growing recognition of the need for alignment of
bioenergy policies with the cascading principle of biomass use[
[11](#footnote12){#footnoteref12 .footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference},
with a view to ensuring fair access to the biomass raw material market
for the development of innovative, high value-added bio-based solutions
and a sustainable circular bioeconomy. When developing support schemes
for bioenergy, Member States should therefore take into consideration
the available sustainable supply of biomass for energy and non-energy
uses and the maintenance of the national forest carbon sinks and
ecosystems as well as the principles of the circular economy and the
biomass cascading use, and the waste hierarchy established in Directive
2008/98/ECof the European Parliament and of the Council[
[12](#footnote13){#footnoteref13 .footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference}.
For this, they should grant no support to the production of energy from
saw logs, veener logs, stumps and roots and avoid promoting the use of
quality roundwood for energy except in well-defined circumstances. In
line with the cascading principle, woody biomass should be used
according to its highest economic and environmental added value in the
following order of priorities: 1) wood-based products, 2) extending
their service life, 3) re-use, 4) recycling, 5) bio-energy and 6)
disposal. Where no other use for woody biomass is economically viable or
environmentally appropriate, energy recovery helps to reduce energy
generation from non-renewable sources. Member States' support schemes
for bioenergy should therefore be directed to such feedstocks for which
little market competition exists with the material sectors, and whose
sourcing is considered positive for both climate and biodiversity, in
order to avoid negative incentives for unsustainable bioenergy pathways,
as identified in the JRC report 'The use of woody biomass for energy
production in the EU'[ [13](#footnote14){#footnoteref14 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference}. On the other hand, in defining the further
implications of the cascading principle, it is necessary to recognise
the national specificities which guide Member States in the design of
their support schemesWaste prevention, reuse and recycling of waste
should be the priority option. Member States should avoid creating
support schemes which would be counter to targets on treatment of waste
and which would lead to the inefficient use of recyclable waste.
Moreover, in order to ensure a more efficient use of bioenergy, from
2026 on Member States should not give support anymore to
electricity-only plants , unless the installations are in regions with a
specific use status as regards their transition away from fossil fuels
or if the installations use carbon capture and storage.

[(5)]{.num}The rapid growth and increasing cost-competitiveness of
renewable electricity production can be used to satisfy a growing share
of energy demand, for instance using heat pumps for space heating or
low-temperature industrial processes, electric vehicles for transport,
or electric furnaces in certain industries. Renewable electricity can
also be used to produce synthetic fuels for consumption in
hard-to-decarbonise transport sectors such as aviation and maritime
transport. A framework for electrification needs to enable robust and
efficient coordination and expand market mechanisms to match both supply
and demand in space and time, stimulate investments in flexibility, and
help integrate large shares of variable renewable generation. Member
States should therefore ensure that the deployment of renewable
electricity continues to increase at an adequate pace to meet growing
demand. For this, Member States should establish a framework that
includes market-compatible mechanisms to tackle remaining barriers to
have secure and adequate electricity systems fit for a high level of
renewable energy, as well as storage facilities, fully integrated into
the electricity system. In particular, this framework shall tackle
remaining barriers, including non-financial ones such as insufficient
digital and human resources of authorities to process a growing number
of permitting applications.

[(6)]{.num}When calculating the share of renewables in a Member State,
renewable fuels of non-biological origin should be counted in the sector
where they are consumed (electricity, heating and cooling, or
transport). To avoid double-counting, the renewable electricity used to
produce these fuels should not be counted. This would result in a
harmonisation of the accounting rules for these fuels throughout the
Directive, regardless of whether they are counted for the overall
renewable energy target or for any sub-target. It would also allow to
count the real energy consumed, taking account of energy losses in the
process to produce those fuels. Moreover, it would allow for the
accounting of renewable fuels of non-biological origin imported into and
consumed in the Union.

[(7)]{.num}Member States' cooperation to promote renewable energy can
take the form of statistical transfers, support schemes or joint
projects. It allows for a cost-efficient deployment of renewable energy
across Europe and contributes to market integration. Despite its
potential, cooperation has been very limited, thus leading to suboptimal
results in terms of efficiency in increasing renewable energy. Member
States should therefore be obliged to test cooperation through
implementing a pilot project. Projects financed by national
contributions under the Union renewable energy financing mechanism
established by Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/1294[
[14](#footnote15){#footnoteref15 .footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference}
would meet this obligation for the Member States involved.

[(8)]{.num}The Offshore Renewable Energy Strategy introduces an
ambitious objective of 300 GW of offshore wind and 40 GW of ocean energy
across all the Union's sea basins by 2050. To ensure this step change,
Member States will need to work together across borders at sea-basin
level. Member States should therefore jointly define the amount of
offshore renewable generation to be deployed within each sea basin by
2050, with intermediate steps in 2030 and 2040. These objectives should
be reflected in the updated national energy and climate plans that will
be submitted in 2023 and 2024 pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2018/1999. In
defining the amount, Member States should take into account the offshore
renewable energy potential of each sea basin, environmental protection,
climate adaptation and other uses of the sea, as well as the Union's
decarbonisation targets. In addition, Member States should increasingly
consider the possibility of combining offshore renewable energy
generation with transmission lines interconnecting several Member
States, in the form of hybrid projects or, at a later stage, a more
meshed grid. This would allow electricity to flow in different
directions, thus maximising socio-economic welfare, optimising
infrastructure expenditure and enabling a more sustainable usage of the
sea.

[(9)]{.num}The market for renewable power purchase agreements is rapidly
growing and provides a complementary route to the market of renewable
power generation in addition to support schemes by Member States or to
selling directly on the wholesale electricity market. At the same time,
the market for renewable power purchase agreements is still limited to a
small number of Member States and large companies, with significant
administrative, technical and financial barriers remaining in large
parts of the Union's market. The existing measures in Article 15 to
encourage the uptake of renewable power purchase agreements should
therefore be strengthened further, by exploring the use of credit
guarantees to reduce these agreements' financial risks, taking into
account that these guarantees, where public, should not crowd out
private financing.

[(10)]{.num}Overly complex and excessively long administrative
procedures constitute a major barrier for the deployment of renewable
energy. On the basis of the measures to improve administrative
procedures for renewable energy installations that Member States are to
report on by 15 March 2023 in their first integrated national energy and
climate progress reports pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the
European Parliament and of the Council[ [15](#footnote16){#footnoteref16
.footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference}, the Commission should assess
whether the provisions included in this Directive to streamline these
procedures have resulted in smooth and proportionate procedures. If that
assessment reveals significant scope for improvement, the Commission
should take appropriate measures to ensure Member States have
streamlined and efficient administrative procedures in place.

[(11)]{.num}Buildings have a large untapped potential to contribute
effectively to the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in the Union.
The decarbonisation of heating and cooling in this sector through an
increased share in production and use of renewable energy will be needed
to meet the ambition set in the Climate Target Plan to achieve the Union
objective of climate neutrality. However, progress on the use of
renewables for heating and cooling has been stagnant in the last decade,
largely relying on increased use of biomass. Without the establishment
of targets to increase the production and use of renewable energy in
buildings, there will be no ability to track progress and identify
bottlenecks in the uptake of renewables. Furthermore, the creation of
targets will provide a long-term signal to investors, including for the
period immediately after 2030. This will complement obligations related
to energy efficiency and the energy performance of buildings. Therefore,
indicative targets for the use of renewable energy in buildings should
be set to guide and incentivise Member States' efforts to exploit the
potential of using and producing renewable energy in buildings,
encourage the development of and integration of technologies which
produce renewable energy while providing certainty for investors and
local level engagement.

[(12)]{.num}Insufficient numbers of skilled workers, in particular
installers and designers of renewable heating and cooling systems, slow
down the replacement of fossil fuel heating systems by renewable energy
based systems and is a major barrier to integrating renewables in
buildings, industry and agriculture. Member States should cooperate with
social partners and renewable energy communities to anticipate the
skills that will be needed. A sufficient number of high-quality training
programmes and certification possibilities ensuring proper installation
and reliable operation of a wide range of renewable heating and cooling
systems should be made available and designed in a way to attract
participation in such training programmes and certification systems.
Member States should consider what actions should be taken to attract
groups currently under-represented in the occupational areas in
question. The list of trained and certified installers should be made
public to ensure consumer trust and easy access to tailored designer and
installer skills guaranteeing proper installation and operation of
renewable heating and cooling.

[(13)]{.num}Guarantees of origin are a key tool for consumer information
as well as for the further uptake of renewable power purchase
agreements. In order to establish a coherent Union base for the use of
guarantees of origin and to provide access to appropriate supporting
evidence for persons concluding renewable power purchase agreements, all
renewable energy producers should be able to receive a guarantee of
origin without prejudice to Member States' obligation to take into
account the market value of the guarantees of origin if the energy
producers receive financial support.

[(14)]{.num}Infrastructure development for district heating and cooling
networks should be stepped up and steered towards harnessing a wider
range of renewable heat and cold sources in an efficient and flexible
way in order to increase the deployment of renewable energy and deepen
energy system integration. It is therefore appropriate to update the
list of renewable energy sources that district heating and cooling
networks should increasingly accommodate and require the integration of
thermal energy storage as a source of flexibility, greater energy
efficiency and more cost-effective operation.

[(15)]{.num}With more than 30 million electric vehicles expected in the
Union by 2030 it is necessary to ensure that they can fully contribute
to the system integration of renewable electricity, and thus allow
reaching higher shares of renewable electricity in a cost-optimal
manner. The potential of electric vehicles to absorb renewable
electricity at times when it is abundant and feed it back into a grid
when there is scarcity has to be fully utilised. It is therefore
appropriate to introduce specific measures on electric vehicles and
information about renewable energy and how and when to access it which
complement those in Directive (EU) 2014/94 of the European Parliament
and of the Council[ [16](#footnote17){#footnoteref17 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference} and the \[proposed Regulation concerning batteries
and waste batteries, repealing Directive 2006/66/EC and amending
Regulation (EU) No 2019/1020\].

[(16)]{.num} In order for flexibility and balancing services from the
aggregation of distributed storage assets to be developed in a
competitive manner, real-time access to basic battery information such
as state of health, state of charge, capacity and power set point should
be provided under non-discriminatory terms and free of charge to the
owners or users of the batteries and the entities acting on their
behalf, such as building energy system managers, mobility service
providers and other electricity market participants. It is therefore
appropriate to introduce measures addressing the need of access to such
data for facilitating the integration-related operations of domestic
batteries and electric vehicles, complementing the provisions on access
to battery data related to facilitating the repurposing of batteries in
\[the proposed Commission regulation concerning batteries and waste
batteries, repealing Directive 2006/66/EC and amending Regulation (EU)
No 2019/1020\]. The provisions on access to battery data of electric
vehicles should apply in addition to any laid down in Union law on type
approval of vehicles.

[(17)]{.num}The increasing number of electric vehicles in road, rail,
maritime and other transport modes will require that recharging
operations are optimised and managed in a way that does not cause
congestion and takes full advantage of the availability of renewable
electricity and low electricity prices in the system. In situations
where bidirectional charging would assist further penetration of
renewable electricity by electric vehicle fleets in transport and the
electricity system in general, such functionality should also be made
available. In view of the long life span of recharging points,
requirements for charging infrastructure should be kept updated in a way
that would cater for future needs and would not result in negative
lock-in effects to the development of technology and services.

[(18)]{.num}Electric vehicle users entering into contractual agreements
with electromobility service providers and electricity market
participants should have the right to receive information and
explanations on how the terms of the agreement will affect the use of
their vehicle and the state of health of its battery. Electromobility
service providers and electricity market participants should explain
clearly to electric vehicle users how they will be remunerated for the
flexibility, balancing and storage services provided to the electricity
system and market by the use of their electric vehicle. Electric vehicle
users also need to have their consumer rights secured when entering into
such agreements, in particular regarding the protection of their
personal data such as location and driving habits, in connection to the
use of their vehicle. Electric vehicle users' preference regarding the
type of electricity purchased for use in their electric vehicle, as well
as other preferences, can also be part of such agreements. For the above
reasons, it is important that electric vehicle users can use their
subscription at multiple recharging points. This will also allow the
electric vehicle user's service provider of choice to optimally
integrate the electric vehicle in the electricity system, through
predictable planning and incentives based on the electric vehicle user
preferences This is also in line with the principles of a
consumer-centric and prosumer-based energy system, and the right of
supplier choice of electric vehicle users as final customers as per the
provisions of Directive (EU) 2019/944.

[(19)]{.num}Distributed storage assets, such as domestic batteries and
batteries of electric vehicles have the potential to offer considerable
flexibility and balancing services to the grid through aggregation. In
order to facilitate the development of such services, the regulatory
provisions concerning connection and operation of the storage assets,
such as tariffs, commitment times and connection specifications, should
be designed in a way that does not hamper the potential of all storage
assets, including small and mobile ones, to offer flexibility and
balancing services to the system and to contribute to the further
penetration renewable electricity, in comparison with larger, stationary
storage assets.

[(20)]{.num}Recharging points where electric vehicles typically park for
extended periods of time, such as where people park for reasons of
residence or employment, are highly relevant to energy system
integration, therefore smart charging functionalities need to be
ensured. In this regard, the operation of non-publicly accessible normal
charging infrastructure is particularly important for the integration of
electric vehicles in the electricity system as it is located where
electric vehicles are parked repeatedly for long periods of time, such
as in buildings with restricted access, employee parking or parking
facilities rented out to natural or legal persons.

[(21)]{.num}Industry accounts for 25% of the Union's energy consumption,
and is a major consumer of heating and cooling, which is currently
supplied 91% by fossil fuels. However, 50% of heating and cooling demand
is low-temperature (\<200 °C) for which there are cost-effective
renewable energy options, including through electrification. In
addition, industry uses non-renewable sources as raw materials to
produce products such as steel or chemicals. Industrial investment
decisions today will determine the future industrial processes and
energy options that can be considered by industry, so it is important
that those investments decisions are future-proof. Therefore, benchmarks
should be put in place to incentivise industry to switch to a
renewables-based production processes that not only are fueled by
renewable energy, but also use renewable-based raw materials such as
renewable hydrogen. Moreover, a common methodology for products that are
labelled as having been produced partially or fully using renewable
energy or using renewable fuels of non-biological origin as feedstock is
required, taking into account existing Union product labelling
methodologies and sustainable product initiatives. This would avoid
deceptive practices and increase consumers trust. Furthermore, given
consumer preference for products that contribute to environmental and
climate change objectives, it would stimulate a market demand for those
products.
:::

::: {.content}
[(22)]{.num}Renewable fuels of non-biological origin can be used for
energy purposes, but also for non-energy purposes as feedstock or raw
material in industries such as steel or chemicals. The use of renewable
fuels of non-biological origin for both purposes exploits their full
potential to replace fossil fuels used as feedstock and to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions in industry and should therefore be included in
a target for the use of renewable fuels of non-biological origin.
National measures to support the uptake of renewable fuels of
non-biological origin in industry should not result in net pollution
increases due to an increased demand for electricity generation that is
satisfied by the most polluting fossil fuels, such as coal, diesel,
lignite, oil peat and oil shale.

[(23)]{.num}Increasing ambition in the heating and cooling sector is key
to delivering the overall renewable energy target given that heating and
cooling constitutes around half of the Union\'s energy consumption,
covering a wide range of end uses and technologies in buildings,
industry and district heating and cooling. To accelerate the increase of
renewables in heating and cooling, an annual 1.1 percentage point
increase at Member State level should be made binding as a minimum for
all Member States. For those Member States, which already have renewable
shares above 50% in the heating and cooling sector, it should remain
possible to only apply half of the binding annual increase rate and
Member States with 60% or above may count any such share as fulfilling
the average annual increase rate in accordance with points b) and c) of
paragraph 2 of Article 23. In addition, Member State-specific top-ups
should be set, redistributing the additional efforts to the desired
level of renewables in 2030 among Member States based on GDP and
cost-effectiveness. A longer list of different measures should also be
included in Directive (EU) 2018/2001 to facilitate increasing the share
of renewables in heating and cooling. Member States may implement one or
more measures from the list of measures.

[(24)]{.num}To ensure that a greater role of district heating and
cooling is accompanied by better information for consumers, it is
appropriate to clarify and strengthen the disclosure of the renewables
share and energy efficiency of these systems.

[(25)]{.num}Modern renewable-based efficient district heating and
cooling systems have demonstrated their potential to provide
cost-effective solutions for integrating renewable energy, increased
energy efficiency and energy system integration, facilitating the
overall decarbonisation of the heating and cooling sector. To ensure
this potential is harnessed, the annual increase of renewable energy
and/or waste heat in district heating and cooling should be raised from
1 percentage point to 2.1 without changing the indicative nature of this
increase, reflecting the uneven development of this type of network
across the Union.

[(26)]{.num}To reflect the increased importance of district heating and
cooling and the need to steer the development of these networks towards
the integration of more renewable energy, it is appropriate to set
requirements to ensure the connection of third party suppliers of
renewable energy and waste heat and cold with district heating or
cooling networks systems above 25MW.

[(27)]{.num}Waste heat and cold are underused despite their wide
availability, leading to a waste of resources, lower energy efficiency
in national energy systems and higher than necessary energy consumption
in the Union. Requirements for closer coordination between district
heating and cooling operators, industrial and tertiary sectors, and
local authorities could facilitate the dialogue and cooperation
necessary to harness cost-effective waste heat and cold potentials via
district heating and cooling systems.

[(28)]{.num}To ensure district heating and cooling participate fully in
energy sector integration, it is necessary to extend the cooperation
with electricity distribution system operators to electricity
transmission system operators and widen the scope of cooperation to grid
investment planning and markets to better utilise the potential of
district heating and cooling for providing flexibility services in
electricity markets. Further cooperation with gas network operators,
including hydrogen and other energy networks, should also be made
possible to ensure a wider integration across energy carriers and their
most cost-effective use.

[(29)]{.num}The use of renewable fuels and renewable electricity in
transport can contribute to the decarbonisation of the Union transport
sector in a cost-effective manner, and improve, amongst other, energy
diversification in that sector while promoting innovation, growth and
jobs in the Union economy and reducing reliance on energy imports. With
a view to achieving the increased target for greenhouse gas emission
savings defined by the Union, the level of renewable energy supplied to
all transport modes in the Union should be increased. Expressing the
transport target as a greenhouse gas intensity reduction target would
stimulate an increasing use of the most cost-effective and performing
fuels, in terms of greenhouse gas savings, in transport. In addition, a
greenhouse gas intensity reduction target would stimulate innovation and
set out a clear benchmark to compare across fuel types and renewable
electricity depending on their greenhouse gas intensity. Complementary
to this, increasing the level of the energy-based target on advanced
biofuels and biogas and introducing a target for renewable fuels of
non-biological origin would ensure an increased use of the renewable
fuels with smallest environmental impact in transport modes that are
difficult to electrify. The achievement of those targets should be
ensured by obligations on fuel suppliers as well as by other measures
included in \[Regulation (EU) 2021/XXX on the use of renewable and
low-carbon fuels in maritime transport - FuelEU Maritime and Regulation
(EU) 2021/XXX on ensuring a level playing field for sustainable air
transport\]. Dedicated obligations on aviation fuel suppliers should be
set only pursuant to \[Regulation (EU) 2021/XXX on ensuring a level
playing field for sustainable air transport\].

[(30)]{.num}Electromobility will play an essential role in decarbonising
the transport sector. To foster the further development of
electromobility, Member States should establish a credit mechanism
enabling operators of charging points accessible to the public to
contribute, by supplying renewable electricity, towards the fulfilment
of the obligation set up by Member States on fuel suppliers. While
supporting electricity in transport through such a mechanism, it is
important that Member States continue setting a high level of ambition
for the decarbonisation of their liquid fuel mix in transport.

[(31)]{.num}The Union's renewable energy policy aims to contribute to
achieving the climate change mitigation objectives of the European Union
in terms of the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. In the pursuit of
this goal, it is essential to also contribute to wider environmental
objectives, and in particular the prevention of biodiversity loss, which
is negatively impacted by the indirect land use change associated to the
production of certain biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels.
Contributing to these climate and environmental objectives constitutes a
deep and longstanding intergenerational concern for Union citizens and
the Union legislator. As a consequence, the changes in the way the
transport target is calculated should not affect the limits established
on how to account toward that target certain fuels produced from food
and feed crops on the one hand and high indirect land-use change-risk
fuels on the other hand. In addition, in order not to create an
incentive to use biofuels and biogas produced from food and feed crops
in transport, Member States should continue to be able to choose whether
count them or not towards the transport target. If they do not count
them, they may reduce the greenhouse gas intensity reduction target
accordingly, assuming that food and feed crop-based biofuels save 50%
greenhouse gas emissions, which corresponds to the typical values set
out in an annex to this Directive for the greenhouse gas emission
savings of the most relevant production pathways of food and feed
crop-based biofuels as well as the minimum savings threshold applying to
most installations producing such biofuels.

[(32)]{.num}Expressing the transport target as a greenhouse gas
intensity reduction target makes it unnecessary to use multipliers to
promote certain renewable energy sources. This is because different
renewable energy sources save different amounts of greenhouse gas
emissions and, therefore, contribute differently to a target. Renewable
electricity should be considered to have zero emissions, meaning it
saves 100% emissions compared to electricity produced from fossil fuels.
This will create an incentive for the use of renewable electricity since
renewable fuels and recycled carbon fuels are unlikely to achieve such a
high percentage of savings. Electrification relying on renewable energy
sources would therefore become the most efficient way to decarbonise
road transport. In addition, in order to promote the use of advanced
biofuels and biogas and renewable fuels of non-biological origin in the
aviation and maritime modes, which are difficult to electrify, it is
appropriate to keep the multiplier for those fuels supplied in those
modes when counted towards the specific targets set for those fuels.

[(33)]{.num}Direct electrification of end-use sectors, including the
transport sector, contributes to the efficiency and facilitates the
transition to an energy system based on renewable energy. It is
therefore in itself an effective means to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions.The creation of a framework on additionality applying
specifically to renewable electricity supplied to electric vehicles in
the transport is therefore not required.

[(34)]{.num}Since renewable fuels of non-biological origin are to be
counted as renewable energy regardless of the sector in which they are
consumed, the rules to determine their renewable nature when produced
from electricity, which were applicable only to those fuels when
consumed in the transport sector, should be extended to all renewable
fuels of non-biological origin, regardless of the sector where they are
consumed.

[(35)]{.num}To ensure higher environmental effectiveness of the Union
sustainability and greenhouse emissions saving criteria for solid
biomass fuels in installations producing heating, electricity and
cooling, the minimum threshold for the applicability of such criteria
should be lowered from the current 20 MW to 5 MW.

[(36)]{.num}Directive (EU) 2018/2001 strengthened the bioenergy
sustainability and greenhouse gas savings framework by setting criteria
for all end-use sectors. It set out specific rules for biofuels,
bioliquids and biomass fuels produced from forest biomass, requiring the
sustainability of harvesting operations and the accounting of land-use
change emissions. To achieve an enhanced protection of especially
biodiverse and carbon-rich habitats, such as primary forests, highly
biodiverse forests, grasslands and peat lands, exclusions and
limitations to source forest biomass from those areas should be
introduced, in line with the approach for biofuels, bioliquids and
biomass fuels produced from agricultural biomass. In addition, the
greenhouse gas emission saving criteria should also apply to existing
biomass-based installations to ensure that bioenergy production in all
such installations leads to greenhouse gas emission reductions compared
to energy produced from fossil fuels.

[(37)]{.num}In order to reduce the administrative burden for producers
of renewable fuels and recycled carbon fuels and for Member States,
where voluntary or national schemes have been recognised by the
Commission through an implementing act as giving evidence or providing
accurate data regarding the compliance with sustainability and
greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria as well as other requirements
set in this Directive, Member States should accept the results of the
certification issued by such schemes within the scope of the
Commission's recognition. In order to reduce the burden on small
installations, Member States should establish a simplified verification
mechanism for installations of between 5 and 10MW.

[(38)]{.num}The Union database to be set up by the Commission aims at
enabling the tracing of liquid and gaseous renewable fuels and recycled
carbon fuels. Its scope should be extended from transport to all other
end-use sectors in which such fuels are consumed. This should make a
vital contribution to the comprehensive monitoring of the production and
consumption of those fuels, mitigating risks of double-counting or
irregularities along the supply chains covered by the Union database. In
addition, to avoid any risk of double claims on the same renewable gas,
a guarantee of origin issued for any consignment of renewable gas
registered in the database should be cancelled.

[(39)]{.num}The Governance Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 makes several
references in a number of places to the Union-level binding target of at
least 32 % for the share of renewable energy consumed in the Union in
2030. As that target needs to be increased in order to contribute
effectively to the ambition to decrease greenhouse gas emissions by 55 %
by 2030, those references should be amended. Any additional planning and
reporting requirements set will not create a new planning and reporting
system, but should be subject to the existing planning and reporting
framework under Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.

[(40)]{.num}The scope of Directive 98/70/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council[ [17](#footnote18){#footnoteref18 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference} should be amended in order to avoid a duplication
of regulatory requirements with regard to transport fuel decarbonisation
objectives and align with Directive (EU) 2018/2001.

[(41)]{.num}The definitions of Directive 98/70/EC should be amended in
order to align them with Directive (EU) 2018/2001 and thereby avoid
different definitions being applied in those two acts.
:::

::: {.content}
[(42)]{.num}The obligations regarding the greenhouse gas emissions
reduction and the use of biofuels in Directive 98/70/EC should be
deleted in order to streamline and avoid double regulation with regards
to the strengthened transport fuel decarbonisation obligations which are
provided for in Directive (EU) 2018/2001.

[(43)]{.num}The obligations regarding the monitoring of and reporting on
the greenhouse gas emission reductions set out in Directive 98/70/EC
should be deleted to avoid regulating reporting obligations twice.

[(44)]{.num}Council Directive (EU) 2015/652, which provides the detailed
rules for the uniform implementation of Article 7a of Directive
98/70/EC, should be repealed as it becomes obsolete with the repeal of
Article 7a of Directive 98/70/EC by this Directive.

[(45)]{.num}As regards bio-based components in diesel fuel, the
reference in Directive 98/70/EC to diesel fuel B7, that is diesel fuel
containing up to 7 % fatty acid methyl esters (FAME), limits available
options to attain higher biofuel incorporation targets as set out in
Directive (EU) 2018/2001. That is due to the fact that almost the entire
Union supply of diesel fuel is already B7. For that reason the maximum
share of bio-based components should be increased from 7% to 10%.
Sustaining the market uptake of B10, that is diesel fuel containing up
to 10 % fatty acid methyl esters (FAME), requires a Union-wide B7
protection grade for 7% FAME in diesel fuel due to the sizeable
proportion of vehicles not compatible with B10 expected to be present in
the fleet by 2030. This should be reflected in Article 4, paragraph 1,
second subparagraph of Directive 98/70/EC as amended by this act.

[(46)]{.num}The transitional provisions should allow for an ordered
continuation of data collection and the fulfilment of reporting
obligations with respect to the articles of Directive 98/70/EC deleted
by this Directive.

[(47)]{.num}In accordance with the Joint Political Declaration of 28
September 2011 of Member States and the Commission on explanatory
documents[ [18](#footnote19){#footnoteref19 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference}, Member States have undertaken to accompany, in
justified cases, the notification of their transposition measures with
one or more documents explaining the relationship between the components
of a directive and the corresponding parts of national transposition
instruments. With regard to this Directive, the legislator considers the
transmission of such documents to be justified, in particular following
the judgment of the European Court of Justice in Case Commission vs
Belgium[ [19](#footnote20){#footnoteref20 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference} (case C-543/17).

HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:

Article 1

Amendments to Directive (EU) 2018/2001

Directive (EU) 2018/2001 is amended as follows:

[(1)]{.num}in Article 2, the second paragraph is amended as follows:

[(a)]{.num}point (36) is replaced by the following:

'(36) 'renewable fuels of non-biological origin' means liquid and
gaseous fuels the energy content of which is derived from renewable
sources other than biomass;';

[(b)]{.num}point (47) is replaced by the following:

'(47) 'default value' means a value derived from a typical value by the
application of pre-determined factors and that may, in circumstances
specified in this Directive, be used in place of an actual value;';
:::

::: {.content}
[(c) ]{.num}the following points are added:

'(1a) 'quality roundwood' means roundwood felled or otherwise harvested
and removed, whose characteristics, such as species, dimensions,
rectitude, and node density, make it suitable for industrial use, as
defined and duly justified by Member States according to the relevant
forest conditions. This does not include pre-commercial thinning
operations or trees extracted from forests affected by fires, pests,
diseases or damage due to abiotic factors ;

[[ [20](#footnote21){#footnoteref21 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference}]{.num} (14a) 'bidding zone' means a bidding zone
as defined in Article 2, point (65) of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of the
European Parliament and of the Council;

[[ [21](#footnote22){#footnoteref22 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference}]{.num}(14b) 'smart metering system' means smart
metering system as defined in Article 2, point (23) of Directive (EU)
2019/944 of the European Parliament and of the Council;

(14c) 'recharging point' means recharging point as defined in point 33
of Article 2, point (33) of Directive (EU) No 2019/944;

(14d) 'market participant' means market participant as defined in point
(25) of Article 2, point (25) of Regulation (EU) 2019/943;

(14e) 'electricity market' means electricity market as defined in
Article 2, point (9) of Directive 2019/944;

(14f) 'domestic battery' means a stand-alone rechargeable battery of
rated capacity greater than 2 kwh, which is suitable for installation
and use in a domestic environment;

[[ [22](#footnote23){#footnoteref23 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference}]{.num}(14g) 'electric vehicle battery' means an
electric vehicle battery as defined in Article 2, point (12) of \[the
proposed Regulation concerning batteries and waste batteries, repealing
Directive 2006/66/EC and amending Regulation (EU) No 2019/1020\];

(14h) 'industrial battery' means industrial battery as defined in
Article 2. point (11) of \[the proposed Regulation concerning batteries
and waste batteries, repealing Directive 2006/66/EC and amending
Regulation (EU) No 2019/1020\];

[[ [23](#footnote24){#footnoteref24 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference}]{.num}(14i) 'state of health' means state of
health as defined in point (25) of Article 2, point (25) of \[the
proposal for a Regulation concerning batteries and waste batteries,
repealing Directive 2006/66/EC and amending Regulation (EU) No 2019/1020
\];

(14j) 'state of charge' means state of charge as defined in Article 2,
point (24) of \[the proposal for a Regulation concerning batteries and
waste batteries, repealing Directive 2006/66/EC and amending Regulation
(EU) 2019/1020\];

(14k) 'power set point' means the information held in a battery's
management system prescribing the electric power settings at which the
battery operates during a recharging or a discharging operation, so that
its state of health and operational use are optimised;

(14l) 'smart charging' means a recharging operation in which the
intensity of electricity delivered to the battery is adjusted in
real-time, based on information received through electronic
communication;

(14m) 'regulatory authority' means regulatory authority defined in
Article 2, point (2) of Regulation (EU) 2019/943;

(14n) 'bidirectional charging' means smart charging where the direction
of electric charge may be reversed, so that electric charge flows from
the battery to the recharging point it is connected to;

(14o) 'normal power recharging point' means 'normal power recharging
point' as defined in Article 2 point 31 of \[the proposal for a
Regulation concerning the deployment of alternative fuel infrastructure,
repealing Directive 2014/94/EU\];

[[ [24](#footnote25){#footnoteref25 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference}]{.num}(18a) 'industry' means companies and
products that fall sections B, C, F and J, division (63) of the
statistical classification of economic activities (NACE REV.2) ;

(18b) 'non-energy purpose' means the use of fuels as raw materials in an
industrial process, instead of being used to produce energy;

(22a) 'renewable fuels' means biofuels, bioliquids, biomass fuels and
renewable fuels of non-biological origin;
:::

::: {.content}
(44a) 'plantation forest' means a planted forest that is intensively
managed and meets, at planting and stand maturity, all the following
criteria: one or two species, even age class, and regular spacing. It
includes short rotation plantations for wood, fibre and energy, and
excludes forests planted for protection or ecosystem restoration, as
well as forests established through planting or seeding which at stand
maturity resemble or will resemble naturally regenerating forests;

(44b) 'planted forest' means forest predominantly composed of trees
established through planting and/or deliberate seeding provided that the
planted or seeded trees are expected to constitute more than fifty
percent of the growing stock at maturity; it includes coppice from trees
that were originally planted or seeded;';

[(2)]{.num} Article 3 is amended as follows:

(a) paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:

'1. Member States shall collectively ensure that the share of energy
from renewable sources in the Union's gross final consumption of energy
in 2030 is at least 40%.';

(b) paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:

'3. Member States shall take measures to ensure that energy from biomass
is produced in a way that minimises undue distortive effects on the
biomass raw material market and harmful impacts on biodiversity. To that
end , they shall take into account the waste hierarchy as set out in
Article 4 of Directive 2008/98/EC and the cascading principle referred
to in the third subparagraph.

As part of the measures referred to in the first subparagraph:

(a) Member States shall grant no support for:

(i) the use of saw logs, veneer logs, stumps and roots to produce
energy.

(ii) the production of renewable energy produced from the incineration
of waste if the separate collection obligations laid down in Directive
2008/98/EC have not been complied with.

(iii) practices which are not in line with the delegated act referred to
in the third subparagraph.

(b) From 31 December 2026, and without prejudice to the obligations in
the first sub-paragraph, Member States shall grant no support to the
production of electricity from forest biomass in
electricity-only-installations, unless such electricity meets at least
one of the following conditions:

(i) it is produced in a region identified in a territorial just
transition plan approved by the European Commission, in accordance with
Regulation (EU) 2021/... of the European Parliament and the Council
establishing the Just Transition Fund due to its reliance on solid
fossil fuels, and meets the relevant requirements set in Article 29(11);
:::

::: {.content}
(ii) it is produced applying Biomass CO2 Capture and Storage and meets
the requirements set in Article 29(11), second subparagraph.

No later than one year after \[the entry into force of this amending
Directive\], the Commission shall adopt a delegated act in accordance
with Article 35 on how to apply the cascading principle for biomass, in
particular on how to minimise the use of quality roundwood for energy
production, with a focus on support schemes and with due regard to
national specificities.

By 2026 the Commission shall present a report on the impact of the
Member States' support schemes for biomass, including on biodiversity
and possible market distortions, and will assess the possibility for
further limitations regarding support schemes to forest biomass.';

(c) the following paragraph 4a is inserted:

'4a. Member States shall establish a framework, which may include
support schemes and facilitating the uptake of renewable power purchase
agreements, enabling the deployment of renewable electricity to a level
that is consistent with the Member State's national contribution
referred to in paragraph 2 and at a pace that is consistent with the
indicative trajectories referred to in Article 4(a)(2) of Regulation
(EU) 2018/1999. In particular, that framework shall tackle remaining
barriers, including those related to permitting procedures, to a high
level of renewable electricity supply. When designing that framework,
Member States shall take into account the additional renewable
electricity required to meet demand in the transport, industry, building
and heating and cooling sectors and for the production of renewable
fuels of non-biological origin.';

[(3)]{.num}Article 7 is amended as follows:

[(a)]{.num}in paragraph 1, the second subparagraph is replaced by the
following:

'With regard to the first subparagraph, point (a), (b), or (c), gas and
electricity from renewable sources shall be considered only once for the
purposes of calculating the share of gross final consumption of energy
from renewable sources. Energy produced from renewable fuels of
non-biological origin shall be accounted in the sector - electricity,
heating and cooling or transport - where it is consumed.'

[(b)]{.num}in paragraph 2, the first subparagraph is replaced by the
following:

'For the purposes of paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (a), gross
final consumption of electricity from renewable sources shall be
calculated as the quantity of electricity produced in a Member State
from renewable sources, including the production of electricity from
renewables self-consumers and renewable energy communities and
electricity from renewable fuels of non-biological origin and excluding
the production of electricity in pumped storage units from water that
has previously been pumped uphill as well as the electricity used to
produce renewable fuels of non-biological origin.';

[(c)]{.num}in paragraph 4, point (a) is replaced by the following:

'(a) Final consumption of energy from renewable sources in the transport
sector shall be calculated as the sum of all biofuels, biogas and
renewable fuels of non-biological origin consumed in the transport
sector.';
:::

::: {.content}
[(4)]{.num}Article 9 is amended as follows:

[(a)]{.num}the following paragraph 1a is inserted:

'1a. By 31 December 2025, each Member State shall agree to establish at
least one joint project with one or more other Member States for the
production of renewable energy. The Commission shall be notified of such
an agreement, including the date on which the project is expected to
become operational. Projects financed by national contributions under
the Union renewable energy financing mechanism established by Commission
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/1294[ [25](#footnote26){#footnoteref26
.footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference} shall be deemed to satisfy this
obligation for the Member States involved.';

 

[(b)]{.num}the following paragraph is inserted:

'7a. Member States bordering a sea basin shall cooperate to jointly
define the amount of offshore renewable energy they plan to produce in
that sea basin by 2050, with intermediate steps in 2030 and 2040. They
shall take into account the specificities and development in each
region, the offshore renewable potential of the sea basin and the
importance of ensuring the associated integrated grid planning. Member
States shall notify that amount in the updated integrated national
energy and climate plans submitted pursuant to Article 14 of Regulation
(EU) 2018/1999.';

[(5)]{.num}Article 15 is amended as follows:

(a) paragraph 2 is replaced as follows:

'2. Member States shall clearly define any technical specifications
which are to be met by renewable energy equipment and systems in order
to benefit from support schemes. Where harmonised standards or European
standards exist, including technical reference systems established by
the European standardisation organisations, such technical
specifications shall be expressed in terms of those standards.
Precedence shall be given to harmonised standards, the references of
which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union
in support of European legislation, in their absence, other harmonised
standards and European standards shall be used, in that order. Such
technical specifications shall not prescribe where the equipment and
systems are to be certified and shall not impede the proper functioning
of the internal market';

(b) paragraphs 4, 5, 6 and 7 are deleted:

(c) paragraph 8 is replaced by the following:

'8. Member States shall assess the regulatory and administrative
barriers to long-term renewables power purchase agreements, and shall
remove unjustified barriers to, and promote the uptake of, such
agreements, including by exploring how to reduce the financial risks
associated with them, in particular by using credit guarantees. Member
States shall ensure that those agreements are not subject to
disproportionate or discriminatory procedures or charges, and that any
associated guarantees of origin can be transferred to the buyer of the
renewable energy under the renewable power purchase agreement.

Member States shall describe their policies and measures promoting the
uptake of renewables power purchase agreements in their integrated
national energy and climate plans referred to in Articles 3 and 14 of
Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 and progress reports submitted pursuant to
Article 17 of that Regulation. They shall also provide, in those
reports, an indication of the volume of renewable power generation
supported by renewables power purchase agreements.';
:::

::: {.content}
(d) the following paragraph 9 is added:

'9. By one year after the entry into force of this amending Directive,
the Commission shall review, and where appropriate, propose
modifications to, the rules on administrative procedures set out in
Articles 15, 16 and 17 and their application, and may take additional
measures to support Member States in their implementation.';

[(6)]{.num}the following Article is inserted:

'Article 15a

Mainstreaming renewable energy in buildings

[1.]{.num}In order to promote the production and use of renewable energy
in the building sector, Member States shall set an indicative target for
the share of renewables in final energy consumption in their buildings
sector in 2030 that is consistent with an indicative target of at least
a 49 % share of energy from renewable sources in the buildings sector in
the Union's final consumption of energy in 2030. The national target
shall be expressed in terms of share of national final energy
consumption and calculated in accordance with the methodology set out in
Article 7. Member States shall include their target in the updated
integrated national energy and climate plans submitted pursuant to
Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 as well as information on how
they plan to achieve it.

[2.]{.num}Member States shall introduce measures in their building
regulations and codes and, where applicable, in their support schemes,
to increase the share of electricity and heating and cooling from
renewable sources in the building stock, including national measures
relating to substantial increases in renewables self-consumption,
renewable energy communities and local energy storage, in combination
with energy efficiency improvements relating to cogeneration and
passive, nearly zero-energy and zero-energy buildings.

To achieve the indicative share of renewables set out in paragraph 1,
Member States shall, in their building regulations and codes and, where
applicable, in their support schemes or by other means with equivalent
effect, require the use of minimum levels of energy from renewable
sources in buildings, in line with the provisions of Directive
2010/31/EU. Member States shall allow those minimum levels to be
fulfilled, among others, through efficient district heating and cooling.

For existing buildings, the first subparagraph shall apply to the armed
forces only to the extent that its application does not cause any
conflict with the nature and primary aim of the activities of the armed
forces and with the exception of material used exclusively for military
purposes.

[3.]{.num}Member States shall ensure that public buildings at national,
regional and local level, fulfil an exemplary role as regards the share
of renewable energy used, in accordance with the provisions of Article 9
of Directive 2010/31/EU and Article 5 of Directive 2012/27/EU. Member
States may, among others, allow that obligation to be fulfilled by
providing for the roofs of public or mixed private-public buildings to
be used by third parties for installations that produce energy from
renewable sources.

[4.]{.num}In order to achieve the indicative share of renewable energy
set out in paragraph 1, Member States shall promote the use of renewable
heating and cooling systems and equipment. To that end, Member States
shall use all appropriate measures, tools and incentives, including,
among others, energy labels developed under Regulation (EU) 2017/1369 of
the European Parliament and of the Council[
[26](#footnote27){#footnoteref27 .footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference},
energy performance certificates pursuant to Directive 2010/31/EU, or
other appropriate certificates or standards developed at national or
Union level, and shall ensure the provision of adequate information and
advice on renewable, highly energy efficient alternatives as well as on
financial instruments and incentives available to promote an increased
replacement rate of old heating systems and an increased switch to
solutions based on renewable energy.';
:::

::: {.content}
[(7)]{.num}in Article 18, paragraphs 3 and 4 are replaced by the
following:

'3. Member States shall ensure that certification schemes are available
for installers and designers of all forms of renewable heating and
cooling systems in buildings, industry and agriculture, and for
installers of solar photovoltaic systems. Those schemes may take into
account existing schemes and structures as appropriate, and shall be
based on the criteria laid down in Annex IV. Each Member State shall
recognise the certification awarded by other Member States in accordance
with those criteria.

Member States shall ensure that trained and qualified installers of
renewable heating and cooling systems are available in sufficient
numbers for the relevant technologies to service the growth of renewable
heating and cooling required to contribute to the annual increase in the
share of renewable energy in the heating and cooling sector as set out
in Article 23.

To achieve such sufficient numbers of installers and designers, Member
States shall ensure that sufficient training programmes leading to
qualification or certification covering renewable heating and cooling
technologies, and their latest innovative solutions, are made available.
Member States shall put in place measures to promote participation in
such programmes, in particular by small and medium-sized enterprises and
the self-employed. Member States may put in place voluntary agreements
with the relevant technology providers and vendors to train sufficient
numbers of installers, which may be based on estimates of sales, in the
latest innovative solutions and technologies available on the market.

4. Member States shall make information on the certification schemes
referred to in paragraph 3 available to the public. Member States shall
ensure that the list of installers who are qualified or certified in
accordance with paragraph 3 is regularly updated and made available to
the public.';

[(8)]{.num}Article 19 is amended as follows:

[(a)]{.num}paragraph 2 is amended as follows:

[(i)]{.num}the first subparagraph is replaced by the following:

'To that end, Member States shall ensure that a guarantee of origin is
issued in response to a request from a producer of energy from renewable
sources. Member States may arrange for guarantees of origin to be issued
for energy from non-renewable sources. Issuance of guarantees of origin
may be made subject to a minimum capacity limit. A guarantee of origin
shall be of the standard size of 1 MWh. No more than one guarantee of
origin shall be issued in respect of each unit of energy produced.';

[(ii)]{.num}the fifth subparagraph is deleted;

[(b)]{.num}in paragraph 8, the first subparagraph is replaced by the
following:

'Where an electricity supplier is required to demonstrate the share or
quantity of energy from renewable sources in its energy mix for the
purposes of Article 3(9), point (a) of Directive 2009/72/EC, it shall do
so by using guarantees of origin except as regards the share of its
energy mix corresponding to non-tracked commercial offers, if any, for
which the supplier may use the residual mix.';

[(9) ]{.num}in Article 20, paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:

'3. Subject to their assessment included in the integrated national
energy and climate plans in accordance with Annex I to Regulation (EU)
2018/1999 on the necessity to build new infrastructure for district
heating and cooling from renewable sources in order to achieve the Union
target set in Article 3(1) of this Directive, Member States shall, where
relevant, take the necessary steps with a view to developing efficient
district heating and cooling infrastructure to promote heating and
cooling from renewable energy sources, including solar energy, ambient
energy, geothermal energy, biomass, biogas, bioliquids and waste heat
and cold, in combination with thermal energy storage.';

[(10)]{.num}the following Article 20a is inserted:

'Article 20a
:::

::: {.content}
Facilitating system integration of renewable electricity

'1. Member States shall require transmission system operators and
distribution system operators in their territory to make available
information on the share of renewable electricity and the greenhouse gas
emissions content of the electricity supplied in each bidding zone, as
accurately as possible and as close to real time as possible but in time
intervals of no more than one hour, with forecasting where available.
This information shall be made available digitally in a manner that
ensures it can be used by electricity market participants, aggregators,
consumers and end-users, and that it can be read by electronic
communication devices such as smart metering systems, electric vehicle
recharging points, heating and cooling systems and building energy
management systems.

2. In addition to the requirements in \[the proposal for a Regulation
concerning batteries and waste batteries, repealing Directive 2006/66/EC
and amending Regulation (EU) No 2019/1020\], Member States shall ensure
that manufacturers of domestic and industrial batteries enable real-time
access to basic battery management system information, including battery
capacity, state of health, state of charge and power set point, to
battery owners and users as well as to third parties acting on their
behalf, such as building energy management companies and electricity
market participants, under non-discriminatory terms and at no cost.

Member States shall ensure that vehicle manufacturers make available, in
real-time, in-vehicle data related to the battery state of health,
battery state of charge, battery power setpoint, battery capacity, as
well as the location of electric vehicles to electric vehicle owners and
users, as well as to third parties acting on the owners' and users'
behalf, such as electricity market participants and electromobility
service providers, under non-discriminatory terms and at no cost, in
addition to further requirements in the type approval and market
surveillance regulation.

3. In addition to the requirements in \[the proposal for a Regulation
concerning the deployment of alternative fuel infrastructure, repealing
Directive 2014/94/EU\], Member States shall ensure that non--publicly
accessible normal power recharging points installed in their territory
from \[the transposition deadline of this amending Directive\] can
support smart charging functionalities and, where appropriate based on
assessment by the regulatory authority, bidirectional charging
functionalities.

4. Member States shall ensure that the national regulatory framework
does not discriminate against participation in the electricity markets,
including congestion management and the provision of flexibility and
balancing services, of small or mobile systems such as domestic
batteries and electric vehicles, both directly and through
aggregation.';

[(11)]{.num} the following Article 22a is inserted:

'Article 22a

Mainstreaming renewable energy in industry

[1.]{.num}Member States shall endeavour to increase the share of
renewable sources in the amount of energy sources used for final energy
and non-energy purposes in the industry sector by an indicative average
minimum annual increase of 1.1 percentage points by 2030.

Member States shall include the measures planned and taken to achieve
such indicative increase in their integrated national energy and climate
plans and progress reports submitted pursuant to Articles 3, 14 and 17
of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.

Member States shall ensure that the contribution of renewable fuels of
non-biological origin used for final energy and non-energy purposes
shall be 50 % of the hydrogen used for final energy and non-energy
purposes in industry by 2030. For the calculation of that percentage,
the following rules shall apply:

(a) For the calculation of the denominator, the energy content of
hydrogen for final energy and non-energy purposes shall be taken into
account, excluding hydrogen used as intermediate products for the
production of conventional transport fuels.

(b) For the calculation of the numerator, the energy content of the
renewable fuels of non-biological origin consumed in the industry sector
for final energy and non-energy purposes shall be taken into account,
excluding renewable fuels of non-biological origin used as intermediate
products for the production of conventional transport fuels.

(c) For the calculation of the numerator and the denominator, the values
regarding the energy content of fuels set out in Annex III shall be
used.

[2.]{.num}Member States shall ensure that industrial products that are
labelled or claimed to be produced with renewable energy and renewable
fuels of non-biological origin shall indicate the percentage of
renewable energy used or renewable fuels of non-biological origin used
in the raw material acquisition and pre-processing, manufacturing and
distribution stage, calculated on the basis of the methodologies laid
down in Recommendation 2013/179/EU[ [27](#footnote28){#footnoteref28
.footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference} or, alternatively, ISO 14067:2018.';
:::

::: {.content}
[(12)]{.num}Article 23 is amended as follows:

[(a)]{.num}paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:

'1. In order to promote the use of renewable energy in the heating and
cooling sector, each Member State shall, increase the share of renewable
energy in that sector by at least 1.1 percentage points as an annual
average calculated for the periods 2021 to 2025 and 2026 to 2030,
starting from the share of renewable energy in the heating and cooling
sector in 2020, expressed in terms of national share of gross final
energy consumption and calculated in accordance with the methodology set
out in Article 7.

That increase shall be of 1.5 percentage points for Member States where
waste heat and cold is used. In that case, Member States may count waste
heat and cold up to 40 % of the average annual increase.

In addition to the minimum 1.1 percentage points annual increase
referred to in the first subparagraph, each Member State shall endeavour
to increase the share of renewable energy in their heating and cooling
sector by the amount set out in Annex 1a.';

[(b)]{.num}the following paragraph 1a is inserted:

'1a. Member States shall carry out an assessment of their potential of
energy from renewable sources and of the use of waste heat and cold in
the heating and cooling sector including, where appropriate, an analysis
of areas suitable for their deployment at low ecological risk and of the
potential for small-scale household projects. The assessment shall set
out milestones and measures to in increase renewables in heating and
cooling and, where appropriate, the use of waste heat and cold through
district heating and cooling with a view of establishing a long-term
national strategy to decarbonise heating and cooling. The assessment
shall be part of the integrated national energy and climate plans
referred to in Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999, and shall
accompany the comprehensive heating and cooling assessment required by
Article 14(1) of Directive 2012/27/EU.';

[(c) ]{.num}in paragraph 2, first subparagraph, point (a) is deleted.

[(d)]{.num}paragraph 4 is replaced by the following:

'4. To achieve the average annual increase referred to in paragraph 1,
first subparagraph, Member States may implement one or more of the
following measures:

[(a)]{.num}physical incorporation of renewable energy or waste heat and
cold in the energy sources and fuels supplied for heating and cooling;

[(b)]{.num}installation of highly efficient renewable heating and
cooling systems in buildings, or use of renewable energy or waste heat
and cold in industrial heating and cooling processes;

[(c)]{.num}measures covered by tradable certificates proving compliance
with the obligation laid down in paragraph 1, first subparagraph,
through support to installation measures under point (b) of this
paragraph, carried out by another economic operator such as an
independent renewable technology installer or an energy service company
providing renewable installation services;

[(d)]{.num}capacity building for national and local authorities to plan
and implement renewable projects and infrastructures;
:::

::: {.content}
[(e)]{.num}creation of risk mitigation frameworks to reduce the cost of
capital for renewable heat and cooling projects;

[(f)]{.num}promotion of heat purchase agreements for corporate and
collective small consumers;

[(g)]{.num}planned replacement schemes of fossil heating systems or
fossil phase-out schemes with milestones;

[(h)]{.num}renewable heat planning, encompassing cooling, requirements
at local and regional level;

[(i)]{.num}other policy measures, with an equivalent effect, including
fiscal measures, support schemes or other financial incentives.

When adopting and implementing those measures, Member States shall
ensure their accessibility to all consumers, in particular those in
low-income or vulnerable households, who would not otherwise possess
sufficient up-front capital to benefit.';

[(13)]{.num}Article 24 is amended as follows:

[(a)]{.num}paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:

'1. Member States shall ensure that information on the energy
performance and the share of renewable energy in their district heating
and cooling systems is provided to final consumers in an easily
accessible manner, such as on bills or on the suppliers\' websites and
on request. The information on the renewable energy share shall be
expressed at least as a percentage of gross final consumption of heating
and cooling assigned to the customers of a given district heating and
cooling system, including information on how much energy was used to
deliver one unit of heating to the customer or end-user.';

[(b)]{.num}paragraph 4 is replaced by the following:

'4. Member States shall endeavour to increase the share of energy from
renewable sources and from waste heat and cold in district heating and
cooling by at least 2.1 percentage points as an annual average
calculated for the period 2021 to 2025 and for the period 2026 to 2030,
starting from the share of energy from renewable sources and from waste
heat and cold in district heating and cooling in 2020, and shall lay
down the measures necessary to that end. The share of renewable energy
shall be expressed in terms of share of gross final energy consumption
in district heating and cooling adjusted to normal average climatic
conditions.

Member States with a share of energy from renewable sources and from
waste heat and cold in district heating and cooling above 60 % may count
any such share as fulfilling the average annual increase referred to in
the first subparagraph.

Member States shall lay down the necessary measures to implement the
average annual increase referred to in the first subparagraph in their
integrated national energy and climate plans pursuant to Annex I to
Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.';
:::

::: {.content}
[(c)]{.num}the following paragraph 4a is inserted:

'4a. Member States shall ensure that operators of district heating or
cooling systems above 25 MWth capacity are obliged to connect third
party suppliers of energy from renewable sources and from waste heat and
cold or are obliged to offer to connect and purchase heat or cold from
renewable sources and from waste heat and cold from third-party
suppliers based on non-discriminatory criteria set by the competent
authority of the Member State concerned, where such operators need to do
one or more of the following:

(a) meet demand from new customers;

(b) replace existing heat or cold generation capacity;

(c) expand existing heat or cold generation capacity.';

[(d)]{.num} paragraphs 5 and 6 are replaced by the following:

'5. Member States may allow an operator of a district heating or cooling
system to refuse to connect and to purchase heat or cold from a
third-party supplier in any of the following situations:

(a) the system lacks the necessary capacity due to other supplies of
heat or cold from renewable sources or of waste heat and cold;

(b) the heat or cold from the third-party supplier does not meet the
technical parameters necessary to connect and ensure the reliable and
safe operation of the district heating and cooling system;

(c) the operator can demonstrate that providing access would lead to an
excessive heat or cold cost increase for final customers compared to the
cost of using the main local heat or cold supply with which the
renewable source or waste heat and cold would compete;

(d) the operator's system meets the definition of efficient district
heating and cooling set out in \[Article x of the proposed recast of the
Energy Efficiency Directive\].

Member States shall ensure that, when an operator of a district heating
or cooling system refuses to connect a supplier of heating or cooling
pursuant to the first subparagraph, information on the reasons for the
refusal, as well as the conditions to be met and measures to be taken in
the system in order to enable the connection, is provided by that
operator to the competent authority. Member States shall ensure that an
appropriate process is in place to remedy unjustified refusals.

6. Member States shall put in place a coordination framework between
district heating and cooling system operators and the potential sources
of waste heat and cold in the industrial and tertiary sectors to
facilitate the use of waste heat and cold. That coordination framework
shall ensure dialogue as regards the use of waste heat and cold
involving at least:

(a) district heating and cooling system operators;

(b) industrial and tertiary sector enterprises generating waste heat and
cold that can be economically recovered via district heating and cooling
systems, such as data centres, industrial plants, large commercial
buildings and public transport; and

(c) local authorities responsible for planning and approving energy
infrastructures.';
:::

::: {.content}
(e) paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 are replaced by the following:

'8. Member States shall establish a framework under which electricity
distribution system operators will assess, at least every four years, in
cooperation with the operators of district heating and cooling systems
in their respective areas, the potential for district heating and
cooling systems to provide balancing and other system services,
including demand response and thermal storage of excess electricity from
renewable sources, and whether the use of the identified potential would
be more resource- and cost-efficient than alternative solutions.

Member States shall ensure that electricity transmission and
distribution system operators take due account of the results of the
assessment required under the first subparagraph in grid planning, grid
investment and infrastructure development in their respective
territories.

Member States shall facilitate coordination between operators of
district heating and cooling systems and electricity transmission and
distribution system operators to ensure that balancing, storage and
other flexibility services, such as demand response, provided by
district heating and district cooling system operators, can participate
in their electricity markets.

Member States may extend the assessment and coordination requirements
under the first and third subparagraphs to gas transmission and
distribution system operators, including hydrogen networks and other
energy networks.

9. Member States shall ensure that the rights of consumers and the rules
for operating district heating and cooling systems in accordance with
this Article are clearly defined, publicly available and enforced by the
competent authority.

10. A Member State shall not be required to apply paragraphs 2 and 9
where at least one of the following conditions is met:

(a) its share of district heating and cooling was less than or equal to
2 % of the gross final energy consumption in heating and cooling on 24
December 2018;

(b) its share of district heating and cooling is increased above 2 % of
the gross final energy consumption in heating and cooling on 24 December
2018 by developing new efficient district heating and cooling based on
its integrated national energy and climate plan pursuant to Annex I to
Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 and the assessment referred to in Article
23(1a) of this Directive;

(c) 90 % of the gross final energy consumption in district heating and
cooling systems takes place in district heating and cooling systems
meeting the definition laid down in \[Article x of the proposed recast
of the Energy Efficiency Directive\].';

[(14)]{.num}Article 25 is replaced by the following:

'Article 25
:::

::: {.content}
[   ]{.tab}Greenhouse gas intensity reduction in the transport sector
from the use of renewable energy

1. Each Member State shall set an obligation on fuel suppliers to ensure
that:

(a) the amount of renewable fuels and renewable electricity supplied to
the transport sector leads to a greenhouse gas intensity reduction of at
least 13 % by 2030, compared to the baseline set out in Article 27(1),
point (b), in accordance with an indicative trajectory set by the
Member State;

(b) the share of advanced biofuels and biogas produced from the
feedstock listed in Part A of Annex IX in the energy supplied to the
transport sector is at least 0,2 % in 2022, 0,5 % in 2025 and 2,2 % in
2030, and the share of renewable fuels of non-biological origin is at
least 2,6 % in 2030.

For the calculation of the reduction referred to in point (a) and the
share referred to in point (b), Member States shall take into account
renewable fuels of non-biological origin also when they are used as
intermediate products for the production of conventional fuels. For the
calculation of the reduction referred to in point (a), Member States may
take into account recycled carbon fuels.

When setting the obligation on fuel suppliers, Member States may exempt
fuel suppliers supplying electricity or renewable liquid and gaseous
transport fuels of non-biological origin from the requirement to comply
with the minimum share of advanced biofuels and biogas produced from the
feedstock listed in Part A of Annex IX with respect to those fuels.

2. Member States shall establish a mechanism allowing fuel suppliers in
their territory to exchange credits for supplying renewable energy to
the transport sector. Economic operators that supply renewable
electricity to electric vehicles through public recharging stations
shall receive credits, irrespectively of whether the economic operators
are subject to the obligation set by the Member State on fuel suppliers,
and may sell those credits to fuel suppliers, which shall be allowed to
use the credits to fulfil the obligation set out in paragraph 1, first
subparagraph.';

[(15)]{.num}Article 26 is amended as follows:

(a)paragraph 1 is amended as follows:

(i) the first subparagraph is replaced by the following:

'For the calculation of a Member State\'s gross final consumption of
energy from renewable sources referred to in Article 7 and of the
greenhouse gas intensity reduction target referred to in Article 25(1),
first subparagraph, point (a), the share of biofuels and bioliquids, as
well as of biomass fuels consumed in transport, where produced from food
and feed crops, shall be no more than one percentage point higher than
the share of such fuels in the final consumption of energy in the
transport sector in 2020 in that Member State, with a maximum of 7 % of
final consumption of energy in the transport sector in that
Member State.';

[ ]{.num}(ii) the fourth subparagraph is replaced by the following:

'Where the share of biofuels and bioliquids, as well as of biomass fuels
consumed in transport, produced from food and feed crops in a
Member State is limited to a share lower than 7 % or a Member State
decides to limit the share further, that Member State may reduce the
greenhouse gas intensity reduction target referred to in Article 25(1),
first subparagraph, point (a), accordingly, in view of the contribution
these fuels would have made in terms of greenhouse gas emissions saving.
For that purpose, Member States shall consider those fuels save 50 %
greenhouse gas emissions.';

(b)in paragraph 2, first and fifth subparagraphs, 'the minimum share
referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 25(1)' is replaced by
'the greenhouse gas emission reduction target referred to in Article
25(1), first subparagraph, point (a)';

[(16)]{.num}Article 27 is amended as follows:
:::

::: {.content}
[(a)]{.num}the title is replaced by the following:

'Calculation rules in the transport sector and with regard to renewable
fuels of non-biological origin regardless of their end use';

[(b)]{.num}paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:

'1. For the calculation of the greenhouse gas intensity reduction
referred to in Article 25(1), first subparagraph, point (a), the
following rules shall apply:

(a) the greenhouse gas emissions savings shall be calculated as follows:

(i) for biofuel and biogas, by multiplying the amount of these fuels
supplied to all transport modes by their emissions savings determined in
accordance with Article 31;

(ii) for renewable fuels of non-biological origin and recycled carbon
fuels, by multiplying the amount of these fuels that is supplied to all
transport modes by their emissions savings determined in accordance with
delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 29a(3);

(iii) for renewable electricity, by multiplying the amount of renewable
electricity that is supplied to all transport modes by the fossil fuel
comparator ECF(e) set out in in Annex V;

(b) the baseline referred to in Article 25(1) shall be calculated by
multiplying the amount of energy supplied to the transport sector by the
fossil fuel comparator EF(t) set out in Annex V;

(c) for the calculation of the relevant amounts of energy, the following
rules shall apply:

(i) in order to determine the amount of energy supplied to the transport
sector, the values regarding the energy content of transport fuels set
out in Annex III shall be used;

(ii) in order to determine the energy content of transport fuels not
included in Annex III, the Member States shall use the relevant European
standards for the determination of the calorific values of fuels. Where
no European standard has been adopted for that purpose, the relevant ISO
standards shall be used;

(iii) the amount of renewable electricity supplied to the transport
sector is determined by multiplying the amount of electricity supplied
to that sector by the average share of renewable electricity supplied in
the territory of the Member State in the two previous years. By way of
exception, where electricity is obtained from a direct connection to an
installation generating renewable electricity and supplied to the
transport sector, that electricity shall be fully counted as renewable;

(iv) the share of biofuels and biogas produced from the feedstock listed
in Part B of Annex IX in the energy content of fuels and electricity
supplied to the transport sector shall, except in Cyprus and Malta, be
limited to 1,7 %;

(d) the greenhouse gas intensity reduction from the use of renewable
energy is determined by dividing the greenhouse gas emissions saving
from the use of biofuels, biogas and renewable electricity supplied to
all transport modes by the baseline.

The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with
Article 35 to supplement this Directive by adapting the energy content
of transport fuels, as set out in Annex III, in accordance with
scientific and technical progress;';

[(c)]{.num}the following paragraph 1a is inserted:

'1a. For the calculation of the targets referred to in Article 25(1),
first subparagraph, point (b), the following rules shall apply:
:::

::: {.content}
(a) for the calculation of the denominator, that is the amount of energy
consumed in the transport sector, all fuels and electricity supplied to
the transport sector shall be taken into account;

(b) for the calculation of the numerator, the energy content of advanced
biofuels and biogas produced from the feedstock listed in Part A of
Annex IX and renewable fuels of non-biological origin supplied to all
transport modes in the territory of the Union shall be taken into
account;

(c) the shares of advanced biofuels and biogas produced from the
feedstock listed in Part A of Annex IX and of renewable fuels of
non-biological origin supplied in the aviation and maritime modes shall
be considered to be 1,2 times their energy content.';

[(d)]{.num}paragraph 2 is deleted.

[(d)]{.num}paragraph 3 is amended as follows:

[(i)]{.num}the first, second and third subparagraphs are deleted;

[(ii)]{.num}the fourth subparagraph is replaced by the following:

'Where electricity is used for the production of renewable fuels of
non-biological origin, either directly or for the production of
intermediate products, the average share of electricity from renewable
sources in the country of production, as measured two years before the
year in question, shall be used to determine the share of renewable
energy.';

[ (iii)]{.num}in the fifth subparagraph, the introductory phrase is
replaced by the following:

'However, electricity obtained from direct connection to an installation
generating renewable electricity may be fully counted as renewable
electricity where it is used for the production of renewable fuels of
non-biological origin, provided that the installation:';

[(17)]{.num}Article 28 is amended as follows:

[(a)]{.num}paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 are deleted.

[(b)]{.num}paragraph 5 is replaced by the following:

'By 31 December 2024, the Commission shall adopt delegated acts in
accordance with Article 35 to supplement this Directive by specifying
the methodology to determine the share of biofuel, and biogas for
transport, resulting from biomass being processed with fossil fuels in a
common process.';

[(c)]{.num}in paragraph 7, 'laid down in the fourth subparagraph of
Article 25(1)' is replaced by 'laid down in Article 25(1), first
subparagraph, point (b)';

[(18)]{.num}Article 29 is amended as follows:
:::

::: {.content}
[(a)]{.num}paragraph 1 is amended as follows:

(i) in the first subparagraph, point (a) is replaced by the following:

[   ]{.tab} [   ]{.tab}'(a) contributing towards the renewable energy
shares of Member States and [   ]{.tab} [   ]{.tab}the targets referred
to in Articles 3(1),15a(1), 22a(1), 23(1), 24(4), and [   ]{.tab}
[   ]{.tab} [   ]{.tab}25(1) of this Directive;';

(ii) the fourth subparagraph is replaced by the following:

'Biomass fuels shall fulfil the sustainability and greenhouse gas
emissions saving criteria laid down in paragraphs 2 to 7 and 10 if used,

[--]{.num}(a) in the case of solid biomass fuels, in installations
producing electricity, heating and cooling with a total rated thermal
input equal to or exceeding 5 MW,

[--]{.num}(b) in the case of gaseous biomass fuels, in installations
producing electricity, heating and cooling with a total rated thermal
input equal to or exceeding 2 MW,

[--]{.num}(c) in the case of installations producing gaseous biomass
fuels with the following average biomethane flow rate:

[(i)]{.num}above 200 m3 methane equivalent/h measured at standard
conditions of temperature and pressure (i.e. 0ºC and 1 bar atmospheric
pressure);

[(ii)]{.num} if biogas is composed of a mixture of methane and
non-combustible other gases, for the methane flow rate, the threshold
set out in point (i), recalculated proportionally to the
volumetric share of methane in the mixture;

(iii) the following subparagraph is inserted after the fourth
subparagraph:

'Member States may apply the sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions
saving criteria to installations with lower total rated thermal input or
biomethane flow rate.';

[(b)]{.num}in paragraph 3, the following subparagraph is inserted after
the first subparagraph:

'This paragraph, with the exception of the first subparagraph, point
(c), also applies to biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels produced
from forest biomass.';

[(c)]{.num}in paragraph 4, the following subparagraph is added:

'The first subparagraph, with the exception of points (b) and (c), and
the second subparagraph also apply to biofuels, bioliquids and biomass
fuels produced from forest biomass.';

[(d)]{.num}paragraph 5 is replaced by the following:

'5. Biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels produced from agricultural or
forest biomass taken into account for the purposes referred to in
paragraph 1, first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c), shall not be
made from raw material obtained from land that was peatland in January
2008, unless evidence is provided that the cultivation and harvesting of
that raw material does not involve drainage of previously undrained
soil.';

[(e)]{.num}in paragraph 6, first subparagraph, point (a), point (iv) is
replaced by the following:

'(iv) that harvesting is carried out considering maintenance of soil
quality and biodiversity with the aim of minimising negative impacts, in
a way that avoids harvesting of stumps and roots, degradation of primary
forests or their conversion into plantation forests, and harvesting on
vulnerable soils; minimises large clear-cuts and ensures locally
appropriate thresholds for deadwood extraction and requirements to use
logging systems that minimise impacts on soil quality, including soil
compaction, and on biodiversity features and habitats:';
:::

::: {.content}
[(f) ]{.num}in paragraph 6, first subparagraph, point (b), point (iv) is
replaced by the following:

'(iv) that harvesting is carried out considering maintenance of soil
quality and biodiversity with the aim of minimising negative impacts, in
a way that avoids harvesting of stumps and roots, degradation of primary
forests or their conversion into plantation forests, and harvesting on
vulnerable soils; minimises large clear-cuts and ensures locally
appropriate thresholds for deadwood extraction and requirements to use
logging systems that minimise impacts on soil quality, including soil
compaction, and on biodiversity features and habitats:';

[(g) ]{.num}in paragraph 10, first subparagraph, point (d) is replaced
by the following:

'(d) at least 70 % for electricity, heating and cooling production from
biomass fuels used in installations until 31 December 2025, and at least
80 % from 1 January 2026.';

[(19)]{.num}the following Article 29a is inserted:

'Article 29a

Greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria for renewable fuels of
non-biological origin and recycled carbon fuels

[1.]{.num}Energy from renewable fuels of non-biological origin shall be
counted towards Member States' shares of renewable energy and the
targets referred to in Articles 3(1), 15a(1), 22a(1), 23(1), 24(4) and
25(1) only if the greenhouse gas emissions savings from the use of those
fuels are at least 70 %.

[2.]{.num}Energy from recycled carbon fuels may be counted towards the
greenhouse gas emissions reduction target referred to in Article 25(1),
first subparagraph, point (a), only if the greenhouse gas emissions
savings from the use of those fuels are at least 70%.

[3.]{.num}The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in
accordance with Article 35 to supplement this Directive by specifying
the methodology for assessing greenhouse gas emissions savings from
renewable fuels of non-biological origin and from recycled carbon fuels.
The methodology shall ensure that credit for avoided emissions is not
given for CO2 the capture of which has already received an emission
credit under other provisions of law.';

[(20)]{.num}Article 30 is amended as follows:

[(a)]{.num}in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, the introductory phrase
is replaced by the following:

'Where renewable fuels and recycled carbon fuels are to be counted
towards the targets referred to in Articles 3(1), 15a(1), 22a(1), 23(1),
24(4) and 25(1), Member States shall require economic operators to show
that the sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria
laid down in Articles 29(2) to (7) and (10) and 29a(1) and (2) for
renewable fuels and recycled-carbon fuels have been fulfilled. For that
purpose, they shall require economic operators to use a mass balance
system which:';

[(b)]{.num}in paragraph 3, the first and second subparagraphs are
replaced by the following:
:::

::: {.content}
'Member States shall take measures to ensure that economic operators
submit reliable information regarding the compliance with the
sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria laid down in
Articles 29(2) to (7) and (10) and 29a(1) and (2), and that economic
operators make available to the relevant Member State, upon request, the
data used to develop that information.

The obligations laid down in this paragraph shall apply regardless of
whether renewable fuels and recycled carbon fuels are produced within
the Union or are imported. Information about the geographic origin and
feedstock type of biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels per fuel
supplier shall be made available to consumers on the websites of
operators, suppliers or the relevant competent authorities and shall be
updated on an annual basis.';

[(c)]{.num}in paragraph 4, the first subparagraph is replaced by the
following:

'The Commission may decide that voluntary national or international
schemes setting standards for the production of renewable fuels and
recycled carbon fuels, provide accurate data on greenhouse gas emission
savings for the purposes of Articles 29(10) and 29a (1) and (2),
demonstrate compliance with Articles 27(3) and 31a(5), or demonstrate
that consignments of biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels comply with
the sustainability criteria laid down in Article 29(2) to (7). When
demonstrating that the criteria laid down in Article 29(6) and (7) are
met, the operators may provide the required evidence directly at
sourcing area level. The Commission may recognise areas for the
protection of rare, threatened or endangered ecosystems or species
recognised by international agreements or included in lists drawn up by
intergovernmental organisations or the International Union for the
Conservation of Nature for the purposes of Article 29(3), first
subparagraph, point (c)(ii).';

[(d)]{.num}paragraph 6 is replaced by the following:

'6. Member States may set up national schemes where compliance with the
sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria laid down in
Articles 29(2) to (7) and (10) and 29a(1) and (2), in accordance with
the methodology developed under Article 29a(3), is verified throughout
the entire chain of custody involving competent national authorities.
Those schemes may also be used to verify the accuracy and completeness
of the information included by economic operators in the Union database,
to demonstrate compliance with Article 27(3) and for the certification
of biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels with low indirect land-use
change-risk.

A Member State may notify such a national scheme to the Commission. The
Commission shall give priority to the assessment of such a scheme in
order to facilitate mutual bilateral and multilateral recognition of
those schemes. The Commission may decide, by means of implementing acts,
whether such a notified national scheme complies with the conditions
laid down in this Directive. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in
accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(3).

Where the decision is positive, other schemes recognised by the
Commission in accordance with this Article shall not refuse mutual
recognition with that Member State's national scheme as regards
verification of compliance with the criteria for which it has been
recognised by the Commission.

For installations producing electricity heating and cooling with a total
rated thermal input between 5 and 10 MW, Member States shall establish
simplified national verification schemes to ensure the fulfillment of
the sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions criteria set out in
paragraphs (2) to (7) and (10) of Article 29.';

[(e)]{.num}in paragraph 9, the first subparagraph is replaced by the
following:

'Where an economic operator provides evidence or data obtained in
accordance with a scheme that has been the subject of a decision
pursuant to paragraph 4 or 6, a Member State shall not require the
economic operator to provide further evidence of compliance with the
elements covered by the scheme for which the scheme has been recognised
by the Commission.';

[(f)]{.num}paragraph 10 is replaced by the following:

'At the request of a Member State, which may be based on the request of
an economic operator, the Commission shall, on the basis of all
available evidence, examine whether the sustainability and greenhouse
gas emissions saving criteria laid down in Article 29(2) to (7) and (10)
and Article 29a(1) and (2) in relation to a source of renewable fuels
and recycled carbon fuels have been met.
:::

::: {.content}
Within six months of receipt of such a request and in accordance with
the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(3), the Commission
shall, by means of implementing acts, decide whether the Member State
concerned may either:

(a) [   ]{.tab}take into account the renewable fuels and recycled carbon
fuels from that source for the purposes referred to in points (a), (b)
and (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 29(1); or

(b) [   ]{.tab}by way of derogation from paragraph 9 of this Article,
require suppliers of the source of renewable fuels and recycled carbon
fuels to provide further evidence of compliance with those
sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria and those
greenhouse gas emissions savings thresholds.';

[(21)]{.num}in Article 31, paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 are deleted:

[(22)]{.num}the following Article is inserted:

'Article 31a

Union database

[1.]{.num}The Commission shall ensure that a Union database is set up to
enable the tracing of liquid and gaseous renewable fuels and recycled
carbon fuels.

[2.]{.num}Member States shall require the relevant economic operators to
enter in a timely manner accurate information into that database on the
transactions made and the sustainability characteristics of the fuels
subject to those transactions, including their life-cycle greenhouse gas
emissions, starting from their point of production to the moment it is
consumed in the Union. Information on whether support has been provided
for the production of a specific consignment of fuel, and if so, on the
type of support scheme, shall also be included in the database.

Where appropriate to improve traceability of data along the entire
supply chain, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in
accordance with Article 35 to further extend the scope of the
information to be included in the Union database to cover relevant data
from the point of production or collection of the raw material used for
the fuel production.

Member States shall require fuel suppliers to enter the information
necessary to verify compliance with the requirements laid down in
Article 25(1), first subparagraph, into the Union database.

[3.]{.num}Member States shall have access to the Union database for the
purposes of monitoring and data verification.

[4.]{.num}If guarantees of origin have been issued for the production of
a consignment of renewable gases, Member States shall ensure that those
guarantees of origin are cancelled before the consignment of renewable
gases can be registered in the database.

[5.]{.num}Member States shall ensure that the accuracy and completeness
of the information included by economic operators in the database is
verified, for instance by using voluntary or national schemes.

For data verification, voluntary or national schemes recognised by the
Commission pursuant to Article 30(4), (5) and (6) may use third party
information systems as intermediaries to collect the data, provided that
such use has been notified to the Commission.

[(23)]{.num}Article 35 is amended as follows:
:::

::: {.content}
[(a)]{.num}paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:

'The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 8(3), second
subparagraph, Article 29a(3), Article 26(2), fourth subparagraph,
Article 26(2) fifth subparagraph, Article 27(1), second subparagraph,
Article 27(3), fourth subparagraph, Article 28(5), Article 28(6), second
subparagraph, Article 31(5), second subparagraph, and Article 31a(2),
second subparagraph, shall be conferred on the Commission for a period
of five years from \[the entry into force of this amending Directive\].
The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of
power not later than nine months before the end of the five-year period.
The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an
identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council
opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of
each period.';

[(b)]{.num}paragraph 4 is replaced by the following:

'The delegation of power referred to in Article 7(3), fifth
subparagraph, Article 8(3), second subparagraph, Article 29a(3), Article
26(2), fourth subparagraph, Article 26(2) fifth subparagraph,
Article 27(1), second subparagraph, Article 27(3), fourth subparagraph,
Article 28(5), Article 28(6), second subparagraph, Article 31(5), and
Article 31a(2), second subparagraph, may be revoked at any time by the
European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an
end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall
take effect the day following the publication of the decision in
the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified
therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already
in force.';

[(c)]{.num}paragraph 7 is replaced by the following:

'A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 7(3), fifth subparagraph,
Article 8(3), second subparagraph, Article 29a(3), Article 26(2), fourth
subparagraph, Article 26(2) fifth subparagraph, Article 27(1), second
subparagraph, Article 27(3), fourth subparagraph, Article 28(5), Article
28(6), second subparagraph, Article 31(5), and Article 31a(2), second
subparagraph, shall enter into force only if no objection has been
expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a
period of two months of notification of that act to the European
Parliament and to the Council or if, before the expiry of that period,
the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the
Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by
two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the
Council.';

[(24)]{.num}the Annexes are amended in accordance with the Annexes to
this Directive.

Article 2

Amendments to Regulation (EU) 2018/1999

[(1)]{.num}Article 2 is amended as follows:

[(a)]{.num}point 11 is replaced by the following:

'(11) 'the Union\'s 2030 targets for energy and climate' means the
Union-wide binding target of at least 40 % domestic reduction in
economy-wide greenhouse gas emissions as compared to 1990 to be achieved
by 2030, the Union\'s binding target for renewable energy in 2030 as
referred to in Article 3 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001, the Union-level
headline target of at least 32,5 % for improving energy efficiency in
2030, and the 15 % electricity interconnection target for 2030 or any
subsequent targets in this regard agreed by the European Council or by
the European Parliament and by the Council for 2030.';

[(b)]{.num}in point 20, point (b) is replaced by the following:

'(b) in the context of Commission recommendations based on the
assessment pursuant to point (b) of Article 29(1) with regard to energy
from renewable sources, a Member State\'s early implementation of its
contribution to the Union\'s binding target for renewable energy in 2030
as referred to in Article 3 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 as measured
against its national reference points for renewable energy;';

[(2)]{.num}In Article 4, point (a)(2) is replaced by the following:

'(2) with respect to renewable energy:

With a view to achieving the Union\'s binding target for renewable
energy in 2030 as referred to in Article 3 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001,
a contribution to that target in terms of the Member State\'s share of
energy from renewable sources in gross final consumption of energy in
2030, with an indicative trajectory for that contribution from 2021
onwards. By 2022, the indicative trajectory shall reach a reference
point of at least 18 % of the total increase in the share of energy from
renewable sources between that Member State\'s binding 2020 national
target, and its contribution to the 2030 target. By 2025, the indicative
trajectory shall reach a reference point of at least 43 % of the total
increase in the share of energy from renewable sources between that
Member State\'s binding 2020 national target and its contribution to the
2030 target. By 2027, the indicative trajectory shall reach a reference
point of at least 65 % of the total increase in the share of energy from
renewable sources between that Member State\'s binding 2020 national
target and its contribution to the 2030 target.

By 2030, the indicative trajectory shall reach at least the Member
State\'s planned contribution. If a Member State expects to surpass its
binding 2020 national target, its indicative trajectory may start at the
level it is projected to achieve. The Member States\' indicative
trajectories, taken together, shall add up to the Union reference points
in 2022, 2025 and 2027 and to the Union\'s binding target for renewable
energy in 2030 as referred to in Article 3 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001.
Separately from its contribution to the Union target and its indicative
trajectory for the purposes of this Regulation, a Member State shall be
free to indicate higher ambitions for national policy purposes.';
:::

::: {.content}
[(3)]{.num}In Article 5, paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:

'2. Member States shall collectively ensure that the sum of their
contributions amounts to at least the level of the Union\'s binding
target for renewable energy in 2030 as referred to in Article 3 of
Directive (EU) 2018/2001.';

[(4)]{.num}In Article 29, paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:

'2. In the area of renewable energy, as part of its assessment referred
to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall assess the progress made in the
share of energy from renewable sources in the Union\'s gross final
consumption on the basis of an indicative Union trajectory that starts
from 20 % in 2020, reaches reference points of at least 18 % in 2022, 43
% in 2025 and 65 % in 2027 of the total increase in the share of energy
from renewable sources between the Union\'s 2020 renewable energy target
and the Union\'s 2030 renewable energy target, and reaches the Union's
binding target for renewable energy in 2030 as referred to in Article 3
of Directive (EU) 2018/2001.';

Article 3

Amendments to Directive 98/70/EC

Directive 98/70/EC is amended as follows:

[(1)]{.num} Article 1 is replaced by the following:

'Article 1

Scope

This Directive sets, in respect of road vehicles, and non-road mobile
machinery (including inland waterway vessels when not at sea),
agricultural and forestry tractors, and recreational craft when not at
sea, technical specifications on health and environmental grounds for
fuels to be used with positive ignition and compression-ignition
engines, taking account of the technical requirements of those
engines.';

[(2)]{.num}Article 2 is amended as follows:

[(a)]{.num}points 1, 2 and 3 are replaced by the following:

'1. 'petrol' means any volatile mineral oil intended for the operation
of internal combustion positive-ignition engines for the propulsion of
vehicles and falling within CN codes 2710 12 41, 2710 12 45 and 2710 12
49;

2. 'diesel fuels' means gas oils falling within CN code 2710 19 43[
[28](#footnote29){#footnoteref29 .footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference} as
referred to in Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 of the European Parliament
and the Council[ [29](#footnote30){#footnoteref30 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference} and Regulation (EC) 595/2009 of the European
Parliament and of the Council[ [30](#footnote31){#footnoteref31
.footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference} and used for self-propelling
vehicles;

'3. 'gas oils intended for use by non-road mobile machinery (including
inland waterway vessels), agricultural and forestry tractors, and
recreational craft' means any petroleum-derived liquid, falling within
CN codes 27101943[ [31](#footnote32){#footnoteref32 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference}, referred to in Directive 2013/53/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council[ [32](#footnote33){#footnoteref33
.footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference}, Regulation (EU) 167/2013 of the
European Parliament and of the Council[ [33](#footnote34){#footnoteref34
.footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference} and Regulation (EU) 2016/1628 of the
European Parliament and of the Council[ [34](#footnote35){#footnoteref35
.footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference} and intended for use in compression
ignition engines.';
:::

::: {.content}
[(b)]{.num} points 8 and 9 are replaced by the following:

'8. 'supplier' means 'fuel supplier' as defined in Article 2, first
paragraph, point (38) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001of the European
Parliament and of the Council[ [35](#footnote36){#footnoteref36
.footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference};

'9. 'biofuels' means 'biofuels' as defined in Article 2, first
paragraph, point (33) of Directive 2018/2001;';

[(3)]{.num}Article 4 is amended as follows:

[(a)]{.num}In paragraph 1, the second subparagraph is replaced by the
following:

'Member States shall require suppliers to ensure the placing on the
market of diesel with a fatty acid methyl ester (FAME) content of up to
7%.'

[(b)]{.num} Paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:

'2, Member States shall ensure that the maximum permissible sulphur
content of gas oils intended for use by non-road mobile machinery
(including inland waterway vessels), agricultural and forestry tractors
and recreational craft is 10 mg/kg. Member States shall ensure that
liquid fuels other than those gas oils may be used in inland waterway
vessels and recreational craft only if the sulphur content of those
liquid fuels does not exceed the maximum permissible content of those
gas oils.';

[(4)]{.num}Articles 7a to 7e are deleted.

[(5)]{.num}Article 9 is amended as follows:

[(a)]{.num}in paragraph 1, points (g), (h), (i) and (k) are deleted;

[(b)]{.num}paragraph 2 is deleted;

[(6)]{.num}Annexes I, II, IV and V are amended in accordance with Annex
I to this Directive.

Article 4

Transitional provisions

[(1)]{.num}Member States shall ensure that the data collected and
reported to the authority designated by the Member State with respect to
the year \[OJ: replace by calendar year during which the repeal takes
effect\] or a part thereof in accordance with Article 7a(1), third
subparagraph, and Article 7a(7) of Directive 98/70/EC, which are deleted
by Article 3(4) of this Directive, are submitted to the Commission.

[(2)]{.num}The Commission shall include the data referred to in
paragraph 1 of this Article in any report it is obliged to submit under
Directive 98/70/EC.
:::

::: {.content}
Article 5

Transposition

[1.]{.num}Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and
administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive by 31
December 2024 at the latest. They shall forthwith communicate to the
Commission the text of those provisions.

When Member States adopt those provisions, they shall contain a
reference to this Directive or be accompanied by such a reference on the
occasion of their official publication. Member States shall determine
how such reference is to be made.

[2.]{.num}Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of
the main provisions of national law which they adopt in the field
covered by this Directive.

Article 6

Repeal

Council Directive (EU) 2015/652[ [36](#footnote37){#footnoteref37
.footnoteRef} ]{.FootnoteReference} is repealed with effect from \[OJ:
replace by calendar year during which the repeal takes effect\].

Article 7

Entry into force

This Directive shall enter into force on the twentieth day following
that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union.

This Directive is addressed to the Member States.

Done at Brussels,

::: {.signature}
For the European Parliament [   ]{.tab} [   ]{.tab} [   ]{.tab}
[   ]{.tab}For the Council

The President [   ]{.tab} [   ]{.tab} [   ]{.tab} [   ]{.tab}The
President
:::
:::

::: {.content}
[ [(1)](#footnoteref2){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}COM/2020/824 final

[ [(2)](#footnoteref3){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}OJ C 326,
26/10/2012, p.1

[ [(3)](#footnoteref4){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}OJ C , , p. .

[ [(4)](#footnoteref5){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}OJ C , , p. .

[ [(5)](#footnoteref6){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Communication from
the Commission COM(2019) 640 final of 11.12.2019, The European Green
Deal.

[ [(6)](#footnoteref7){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Communication from
the Commission COM(2020) 562 final of 17.9.2020, Stepping up Europe's
2030 climate ambition Investing in a climate-neutral future for the
benefit of our people

[ [(7)](#footnoteref8){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}European Parliament
resolution of 15 January 2020 on the European Green Deal
(2019/2956(RSP))

[ [(8)](#footnoteref9){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}European Council
conclusions of 11 December 2020,
<https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/47296/1011-12-20-euco-conclusions-en.pdf>

[ [(9)](#footnoteref10){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Directive (EU)
2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December
2018 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources, OJ L
328, 21.12.2018, p. 82--209

[ [(10)](#footnoteref11){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Point 3 of the
Communication from the Commission COM(2020) 562 final of 17.9.2020,
Stepping up Europe's 2030 climate ambition Investing in a
climate-neutral future for the benefit of our people

[ [(11)](#footnoteref12){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}The cascading
principle aims to achieve resource efficiency of biomass use through
prioritising biomass material use to energy use wherever possible,
increasing thus the amount of biomass available within the system. In
line with the cascading principle, woody biomass should be used
according to its highest economic and environmental added value in the
following order of priorities: 1) wood-based products, 2) extending
their service life, 3) re-use, 4) recycling, 5) bio-energy and 6)
disposal.

[ [(12)](#footnoteref13){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Directive
2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November
2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives ( [OJ L 312, 22.11.2008,
p. 3](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/AUTO/?uri=OJ:L:2008:312:TOC){.externalRef}
).

[ [(13)](#footnoteref14){.footnote} ]{.num}
[   ]{.tab}https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC122719

[ [(14)](#footnoteref15){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Commission
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/1294 of 15 September 2020 on the Union
renewable energy financing mechanism (OJ L 303, 17.9.2020, p. 1).

[ [(15)](#footnoteref16){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Regulation (EU)
2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December
2018 on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action, amending
Regulations (EC) No 663/2009 and (EC) No 715/2009 of the European
Parliament and of the Council, Directives 94/22/EC, 98/70/EC,
2009/31/EC, 2009/73/EC, 2010/31/EU, 2012/27/EU and 2013/30/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 2009/119/EC
and (EU) 2015/652 and repealing Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the
European Parliament and of the Council ([OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p.
1).]{.Emphasis}

[ [(16)](#footnoteref17){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Directive
2014/94/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 October
2014 on the deployment of alternative fuels infrastructure (OJ L 307,
28.10.2014, p. 1) 

[ [(17)](#footnoteref18){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Directive
98/70/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October
1998 relating to the quality of petrol and diesel fuels and amending
Council Directive 93/12/EEC (OJ L 350, 28.12.1998, p. 58).

[ [(18)](#footnoteref19){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}OJ C 369,
17.12.2011, p. 14.

[ [(19)](#footnoteref20){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Judgment of the
Court of Justice of 8 July 2019, Commission v Belgium, C-543/17, ECLI:
EU: C:2019:573.

[ [(20)](#footnoteref21){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Regulation (EU)
2019/943 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on
the internal market for electricity (OJ L 158, 14.6.2019, p. 54).

[ [(21)](#footnoteref22){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Directive
Regulation (EU) 2019/944 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 5 June 2019 on common rules for the internal market for electricity
and amending Directive 2012/27/EU (OJ L 158, 14.6.2019, p. 125).

[ [(22)](#footnoteref23){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}COM(2020) 798
final

[ [(23)](#footnoteref24){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}the proposal for
a Commission Regulation 'concerning batteries and waste batteries,
repealing Directive 2006/66/EC and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/1020
(xxxx).

[ [(24)](#footnoteref25){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Regulation (EC)
No 1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20
December 2006 establishing the statistical classification of economic
activities NACE Revision 2 and amending Council Regulation (EEC) No
3037/90 as well as certain EC Regulations on specific statistical
domains (OJ L 393, 30.12.2006, p. 1).';

[ [(25)](#footnoteref26){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Commission
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/1294 of 15 September 2020 on the Union
renewable energy financing mechanism (OJ L 303, 17.9.2020, p. 1).

[ [(26)](#footnoteref27){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Regulation (EU)
2017/1369 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2017
setting a framework for energy labelling and repealing Directive
2010/30/EU (OJ L 198, 28.7.2017, p. 1).

[ [(27)](#footnoteref28){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}2013/179/EU:
Commission Recommendation of 9 April 2013 on the use of common methods
to measure and communicate the life cycle environmental performance of
products and organisations, OJ L 124, 4.5.2013, p. 1--210

[ [(28)](#footnoteref29){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}The numbering of
these CN codes as specified in the Common Customs Tariff, Council
Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87 of 23 July 1987 on the tariff and
statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256
7.9.1987, p. 1).

[ [(29)](#footnoteref30){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Regulation (EC)
No 715/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 June
2007 on type approval of motor vehicles with respect to emissions from
light passenger and commercial vehicles (Euro 5 and Euro 6) and on
access to vehicle repair and maintenance information (OJ L 171,
29.6.2007, p. 1).

[ [(30)](#footnoteref31){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Regulation (EC)
No 595/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June
2009 on type-approval of motor vehicles and engines with respect to
emissions from heavy duty vehicles (Euro VI) and on access to vehicle
repair and maintenance information and amending Regulation (EC) No
715/2007 and Directive 2007/46/EC and repealing Directives 80/1269/EEC,
2005/55/EC and 2005/78/EC (OJ L 188, 18.7.2009, p. 1);

[ [(31)](#footnoteref32){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}The numbering of
these CN codes as specified in the Common Customs Tariff, Council
Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87 of 23 July 1987 on the tariff and
statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256
7.9.1987, p. 1).

[ [(32)](#footnoteref33){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Directive
2013/53/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 November
2013 on recreational craft and personal watercraft and repealing
Directive 94/25/EC (OJ L 354, 28.12.2013, p.90).

[ [(33)](#footnoteref34){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Regulation (EU)
No 167/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5.02.2013
on the approval and market surveillance of agricultural and forestry
vehicles, (OJ L 060 of 2.3.2013, p. 1).

[ [(34)](#footnoteref35){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Regulation (EU)
2016/1628 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 September
2016 on requirements relating to gaseous and particulate pollutant
emission limits and type-approval for internal combustion engines for
non-road mobile machinery, amending Regulations (EU) No 1024/2012 and
(EU) No 167/2013, and amending and repealing Directive 97/68/EC,( OJ L
354 of 28.12.2013, p.53).

[ [(35)](#footnoteref36){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Directive (EU)
2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the promotion
of the use of energy from renewable sources, (OJ L 328 of 21.12.2018, p.
82.)

[ [(36)](#footnoteref37){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Council Directive
(EU) 2015/652 of 20 April 2015 laying down calculation methods and
reporting requirements pursuant to Directive 98/70/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council relating to the quality of petrol and
diesel fuels, OJ L 107, 25.4.2015, p. 26--67
:::
:::

\

::: {.contentWrapper}
::: {.content}
![european flag](./../../../../images/eclogo.jpg)EUROPEAN COMMISSION

Brussels, 14.7.2021

COM(2021) 557 final

ANNEXES

to the

Proposal for a

DIRECTIVE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
amending Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the
Council,  Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of
the Council and Directive 98/70/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council  as regards the promotion of energy from renewable sources, and
repealing Council Directive (EU) 2015/652

{SEC(2021) 657 final} - {SWD(2021) 620 final} - {SWD(2021) 621 final} -
{SWD(2021) 622 final}

::: {.pageBreak}
\
:::
:::

::: {.content}
ANNEX I

The Annexes to Directive (EU) 2018/2001 are amended as follows:

[(1)]{.num}in Annex I, the final row in the table is deleted;

[(2)]{.num}the following Annex 1a is inserted:

'ANNEX 1a

NATIONAL HEATING AND COOLING SHARES OF ENERGY FROM RENEWABLE SOURCES IN
GROSS FINAL CONSUMPTION OF ENERGY FOR 2020-2030

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | Baseline shares       | Resulting renewable   |
|                       | increase (in          | heating and cooling   |
|                       | percentage. points)   | shares in 2030 in     |
|                       |                       | percentage points     |
|                       | (REF20/NECPs)         | including top ups (at |
|                       |                       | least)                |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Belgium               | 0,3%                  | 1,4%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Bulgaria              | 0,9%                  | 1,4%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Czech Republic        | 0,5%                  | 1,4%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Denmark               | 0,9%                  | 1,4%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Germany               | 0,9%                  | 1,5%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Estonia               | 1,2%                  | 1,5%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Ireland               | 2,1%                  | 2,9%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Greece                | 1,6%                  | 2,0%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Spain                 | 1,1%                  | 1,4%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| France                | 1,4%                  | 1,8%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Croatia               | 0,7%                  | 1,4%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Italy                 | 1,2%                  | 1,6%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Cyprus                | 0,5%                  | 1,6%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Latvia                | 0,8%                  | 1,0%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Lithuania             | 1,6%                  | 2,0%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Luxembourg            | 2,0%                  | 2,7%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Hungary               | 0,9%                  | 1,5%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Malta                 | 0,5%                  | 1,5%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Netherlands           | 0,7%                  | 1,4%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Austria               | 0,7%                  | 1,5%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Poland                | 1,0%                  | 1,5%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Portugal              | 1,0%                  | 1,4%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Romania               | 0,6%                  | 1,4%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Slovenia              | 0,7%                  | 1,4%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Slovakia              | 0,3%                  | 1,4%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Finland               | 0,5%                  | 0,8%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Sweden                | 0,3%                  | 0,6%                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

[(3)]{.num}Annex III is replaced by the following:

ENERGY CONTENT OF FUELS

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------
  Fuel                                                                                                                                                               Energy content by weight (lower calorific value, MJ/kg)   Energy content by volume (lower calorific value, MJ/l)
  FUELS FROM BIOMASS AND/OR BIOMASS PROCESSING OPERATIONS                                                                                                                                                                      
  Bio-Propane                                                                                                                                                        46                                                        24
  Pure vegetable oil (oil produced from oil plants through pressing, extraction or comparable procedures, crude or refined but chemically unmodified)                37                                                        34
  Biodiesel - fatty acid methyl ester (methyl-ester produced from oil of biomass origin)                                                                             37                                                        33
  Biodiesel - fatty acid ethyl ester (ethyl-ester produced from oil of biomass origin)                                                                               38                                                        34
  Biogas that can be purified to natural gas quality                                                                                                                 50                                                        ---
  Hydrotreated (thermochemically treated with hydrogen) oil of biomass origin, to be used for replacement of diesel                                                  44                                                        34
  Hydrotreated (thermochemically treated with hydrogen) oil of biomass origin, to be used for replacement of petrol                                                  45                                                        30
  Hydrotreated (thermochemically treated with hydrogen) oil of biomass origin, to be used for replacement of jet fuel                                                44                                                        34
  Hydrotreated oil (thermochemically treated with hydrogen) of biomass origin, to be used for replacement of liquefied petroleum gas                                 46                                                        24
  Co-processed oil (processed in a refinery simultaneously with fossil fuel) of biomass or pyrolysed biomass origin to be used for replacement of diesel             43                                                        36
  Co-processed oil (processed in a refinery simultaneously with fossil fuel) of biomass or pyrolysed biomass origin, to be used to replace petrol                    44                                                        32
  Co-processed oil (processed in a refinery simultaneously with fossil fuel) of biomass or pyrolysed biomass origin, to be used to replace jet fuel                  43                                                        33
  Co-processed oil (processed in a refinery simultaneously with fossil fuel) of biomass or pyrolysed biomass origin, to be used to replace liquefied petroleum gas   46                                                        23
  RENEWABLE FUELS THAT CAN BE PRODUCED FROM VARIOUS RENEWABLE SOURCES, INCLUDING BIOMASS                                                                                                                                       
  Methanol from renewable sources                                                                                                                                    20                                                        16
  Ethanol from renewable sources                                                                                                                                     27                                                        21
  Propanol from renewable sources                                                                                                                                    31                                                        25
  Butanol from renewable sources                                                                                                                                     33                                                        27
  Fischer-Tropsch diesel (a synthetic hydrocarbon or mixture of synthetic hydrocarbons to be used for replacement of diesel)                                         44                                                        34
  Fischer-Tropsch petrol (a synthetic hydrocarbon or mixture of synthetic hydrocarbons produced from biomass, to be used for replacement of petrol)                  44                                                        33
  Fischer-Tropsch jet fuel (a synthetic hydrocarbon or mixture of synthetic hydrocarbons produced from biomass, to be used for replacement of jet fuel)              44                                                        33
  Fischer-Tropsch liquefied petroleum gas (a synthetic hydrocarbon or mixture of synthetic hydrocarbons, to be used for replacement of liquefied petroleum gas       46                                                        24
  DME (dimethylether)                                                                                                                                                28                                                        19
  Hydrogen from renewable sources                                                                                                                                    120                                                       ---
  ETBE (ethyl-tertio-butyl-ether produced on the basis of ethanol)                                                                                                   36 (of which 37 % from renewable sources)                 27 (of which 37 % from renewable sources)
  MTBE (methyl-tertio-butyl-ether produced on the basis of methanol)                                                                                                 35 (of which 22 % from renewable sources)                 26 (of which 22 % from renewable sources)
  TAEE (tertiary-amyl-ethyl-ether produced on the basis of ethanol)                                                                                                  38 (of which 29 % from renewable sources)                 29 (of which 29 % from renewable sources)
  TAME (tertiary-amyl-methyl-ether produced on the basis of methanol)                                                                                                36 (of which 18 % from renewable sources)                 28 (of which 18 % from renewable sources)
  THxEE (tertiary-hexyl-ethyl-ether produced on the basis of ethanol)                                                                                                38 (of which 25 % from renewable sources)                 30 (of which 25 % from renewable sources)
  THxME (tertiary-hexyl-methyl-ether produced on the basis of methanol)                                                                                              38 of which 14 % from renewable sources)                  30 (of which 14 % from renewable sources)
  NON-RENEWABLE FUELS                                                                                                                                                                                                          
  Petrol                                                                                                                                                             43                                                        32
  Diesel                                                                                                                                                             43                                                        36
  Hydrogen from non-renewable sources                                                                                                                                120                                                       ---
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------

[(4)]{.num}Annex IV is amended as follows:

[a)]{.num}the title is replaced by the following:

'TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION OF INSTALLERS AND DESIGNERS OF RENEWABLE
INSTALLATIONS'

[b)]{.num}the introductory sentence and the first point are replaced by
the following:

'The certification schemes and training programmes referred to in
Article 18(3) shall be based on the following criteria:

1. The certification process shall be transparent and clearly defined by
the Member States or by the administrative body that they appoint.';

[c)]{.num}The following points 1a and 1b are inserted:
:::

::: {.content}
'1a. The certificates issued by certification bodies shall be clearly
defined and easy to identify for workers and professionals seeking
certification.

1b. The certification process shall enable installers to put in place
high quality installations that operate reliably.';

[d)]{.num}Points 2 and 3 are replaced by the following:

'2. Installers of biomass, heat pump, shallow geothermal, solar
photovoltaic and solar thermal energy shall be certified by an
accredited training programme or training provider.'

3. The accreditation of the training programme or provider shall be
effected by Member States or by the administrative body that they
appoint. The accrediting body shall ensure that the training programme
offered by the training provider has continuity and regional or national
coverage.

The training provider shall have adequate technical facilities to
provide practical training, including sufficient laboratory equipment or
corresponding facilities to provide practical training.

The training provider shall offer, in addition to the basic training,
shorter refresher and upskilling courses organised in training modules
allowing installers and designers to add new competences, widen and
diversify their skills across several technologies and their
combinations. The training provider shall ensure adaptation of training
to new renewable technologies in the context of buildings, industry and
agriculture. Training providers shall recognise acquired relevant
skills.

The training programmes and modules shall be designed to enable
life-long learning in renewable installations and be compatible with
vocational training for first time job seekers and adults seeking
reskilling or new employment.

The training programmes shall be designed in order to facilitate
acquiring qualification in different technologies and solutions and
avoid limited specialisation in a specific brand or technology. The
training provider may be the manufacturer of the equipment or system,
institutes or associations.';

[e)]{.num} In point 6(c) the following points (iv) and (v) are added :

'(iv) [   ]{.tab}an understanding of feasibility and design studies;

(v) [   ]{.tab}an understanding of drilling, in the case of geothermal
heat pumps.';

[(5)]{.num} In Annex V, part C is amended as follows:

[a)]{.num}points 5 and 6 are replaced by the following:

'5. Emissions from the extraction or cultivation of raw materials, eec,
shall, include emissions from the extraction or cultivation process
itself; from the collection, drying and storage of raw materials; from
waste and leakages; and from the production of chemicals or products
used in extraction or cultivation. Capture of CO2 in the cultivation of
raw materials shall be excluded. If available, the disaggregated default
values for soil N2O emissions set out in Part D shall be applied in the
calculation. It is allowed to calculate averages based on local farming
practices based on data of a group of farms, as an alternative to using
actual values.';

6. For the purposes of the calculation referred to in point 1(a),
greenhouse gas emissions savings from improved agriculture management,
esca, such as shifting to reduced or zero-tillage, improved
crop/rotation, the use of cover crops, including crop residue
management, and the use of organic soil improver (e.g. compost, manure
fermentation digestate), shall be taken into account only if they do not
risk to negatively affect biodiversity. Further, solid and verifiable
evidence shall be provided that the soil carbon has increased or that it
is reasonable to expect to have increased over the period in which the
raw materials concerned were cultivated while taking into account the
emissions where such practices lead to increased fertiliser and
herbicide use[ [1](#footnote1){#footnoteref1 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference}.';

[b)]{.num}point 15 is deleted:

[c)]{.num}point 18 is replaced by the following:

'18. For the purposes of the calculations referred to in point 17, the
emissions to be divided shall be eec + el + esca + those fractions of
ep, etd, eccs and eccr that take place up to and including the process
step at which a co-product is produced. If any allocation to co-products
has taken place at an earlier process step in the life-cycle, the
fraction of those emissions assigned in the last such process step to
the intermediate fuel product shall be used for those purposes instead
of the total of those emissions. In the case of biogas and biomethane,
all co-products that do not fall under the scope of point 7 shall be
taken into account for the purposes of that calculation. No emissions
shall be allocated to wastes and residues. Co-products that have a
negative energy content shall be considered to have an energy content of
zero for the purposes of the calculation. Wastes and residues including
all wastes and residues included in Annex IX shall be considered to have
zero life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions up to the process of collection
of those materials irrespectively of whether they are processed to
interim products before being transformed into the final product.
Residues that are not included in Annex IX and fit for use in the food
or feed market shall be considered to have the same amount of emissions
from the extraction, harvesting or cultivation of raw materials, eec as
their closest substitute in the food and feed market that is included in
the table in part D. In the case of biomass fuels produced in
refineries, other than the combination of processing plants with boilers
or cogeneration units providing heat and/or electricity to the
processing plant, the unit of analysis for the purposes of the
calculation referred to in point 17 shall be the refinery';

[(6)]{.num}In Annex VI, part B is amended as follows:
:::

::: {.content}
[a)]{.num}points 5 and 6 are replaced by the following:

'5. Emissions from the extraction or cultivation of raw materials, eec,
shall, include emissions from the extraction or cultivation process
itself; from the collection, drying and storage of raw materials; from
waste and leakages; and from the production of chemicals or products
used in extraction or cultivation. Capture of CO2 in the cultivation of
raw materials shall be excluded. If available, the disaggregated default
values for soil N2O emissions set out in Part D shall be applied in the
calculation. It is allowed to calculate averages based on local farming
practises based on data of a group of farms, as an alternative to using
actual values.'

6. For the purposes of the calculation referred to in point 1(a),
greenhouse gas emissions savings from improved agriculture management,
esca, such as shifting to reduced or zero-tillage, improved
crop/rotation, the use of cover crops, including crop residue
management, and the use of organic soil improver (e.g. compost, manure
fermentation digestate), shall be taken into account only if they do not
risk to negatively affect biodiversity. Further, solid and verifiable
evidence shall be provided that the soil carbon has increased or that it
is reasonable to expect to have increased over the period in which the
raw materials concerned were cultivated while taking into account the
emissions where such practices lead to increased fertiliser and
herbicide use[ [2](#footnote2){#footnoteref2 .footnoteRef}
]{.FootnoteReference}.';

[b)]{.num}point 15 is deleted:

[c)]{.num}point 18 is replaced by the following:

'18. For the purposes of the calculations referred to in point 17, the
emissions to be divided shall be eec + el + esca + those fractions of
ep, etd, eccs and eccr that take place up to and including the process
step at which a co-product is produced. If any allocation to co-products
has taken place at an earlier process step in the life-cycle, the
fraction of those emissions assigned in the last such process step to
the intermediate fuel product shall be used for those purposes instead
of the total of those emissions.

In the case of biogas and biomethane, all co-products that do not fall
under the scope of point 7 shall be taken into account for the purposes
of that calculation. No emissions shall be allocated to wastes and
residues. Co-products that have a negative energy content shall be
considered to have an energy content of zero for the purposes of the
calculation.

Wastes and residues including all wastes and residues included in Annex
IX shall be considered to have zero life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions
up to the process of collection of those materials irrespectively of
whether they are processed to interim products before being transformed
into the final product. Residues that are not included in Annex IX and
fit for use in the food or feed market shall be considered to have the
same amount of emissions from the extraction, harvesting or cultivation
of raw materials, eec as their closest substitute in the food and feed
market that is included in the table in part D of Annex V.

In the case of biomass fuels produced in refineries, other than the
combination of processing plants with boilers or cogeneration units
providing heat and/or electricity to the processing plant, the unit of
analysis for the purposes of the calculation referred to in point 17
shall be the refinery'

[(7)]{.num} in Annex VII, in the definition of 'Qusable', the reference
to Article 7(4) is replaced by a reference to Article 7(3).

[(8)]{.num}Annex IX is amended as follows:

[(a)]{.num}in Part A, the introductory phrase is replaced by the
following:

'Feedstocks for the production of biogas for transport and advanced
biofuels:'

[(b)]{.num}In Part B, the introductory phrase is replaced by the
following:

'Feedstocks for the production of biofuels and biogas for transport, the
contribution of which towards the greenhouse gas emissions reduction
target established in Article 25(1), first subparagraph, point (a),
shall be limited:';

ANNEX II

Annexes I, II, IV and V to Directive 98/70/EC are amended as follows:

[(1)]{.num} Annex I is amended as follows:
:::

::: {.content}
[(a)]{.num}the text of footnote 1 is replaced by the following:

'(1) Test methods shall be those specified in EN 228:2012+A1:2017.
Member States may adopt the analytical method specified in replacement
EN 228:2012+A1:2017 standard if it can be shown to give at least the
same accuracy and at least the same level of precision as the analytical
method it replaces.' ;

[(b)]{.num}the text of footnote 2 is replaced by the following:

[   ]{.tab}'(2) the values quoted in the specification are 'true
values'. In the establishment of their limit values, the terms of EN ISO
4259-1:2017/A1:2021 'Petroleum and related products --- Precision of
measurement methods and results -- Part 1: Determination of precision
data in relation to methods of test' have been applied and in fixing a
minimum value, a minimum difference of 2R above zero has been taken into
account (R = reproducibility). The results of individual measurements
shall be interpreted on the basis of the criteria described in EN ISO
4259-2:2017/A1:2019.';

[(c)]{.num}the text of footnote 6 is replaced by the following:

'(6) Other mono-alcohols and ethers with a final boiling point no higher
than that stated in EN 228:2012 +A1:2017.'

[(2)]{.num} Annex II is amended as follows:

[(a)]{.num}in the last line of the table, 'FAME content -- EN 14078, the
entry in the last column 'Limits' 'Maximum', '7,0' is replaced by
'10.0';

[(b)]{.num}the text of footnote 1 is replaced by the following:

'(1) Test methods shall be those specified in EN 590:2013+A1:2017.
Member States may adopt the analytical method specified in replacement
EN 590:2013+A1:2017 standard if it can be shown to give at least the
same accuracy and at least the same level of precision as the analytical
method it replaces.';

[(c)]{.num}the text of footnote 2 is replaced by the following:

'(2) The values quoted in the specification are 'true values'. In the
establishment of their limit values, the terms of EN ISO
4259-1:2017/A1:2021 'Petroleum and related products --- Precision or
measurement methods and results -- Part 1: Determination of precision
data in relation to methods of test' have been applied and in fixing a
minimum value, a minimum difference of 2R above zero has been taken into
account (R = reproducibility). The results of individual measurements
shall be interpreted on the basis of the criteria described in EN ISO
4259-2:2017/A1:2019.';

[(3)]{.num}Annexes IV and V are deleted.
:::

::: {.content}
[ [(1)](#footnoteref1){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Measurements of
soil carbon can constitute such evidence, e.g. by a first measurement in
advance of the cultivation and subsequent ones at regular intervals
several years apart. In such a case, before the second measurement is
available, increase in soil carbon would be estimated on the basis of
representative experiments or soil models. From the second measurement
onwards, the measurements would constitute the basis for determining the
existence of an increase in soil carbon and its magnitude.

[ [(2)](#footnoteref2){.footnote} ]{.num} [   ]{.tab}Measurements of
soil carbon can constitute such evidence, e.g. by a first measurement in
advance of the cultivation and subsequent ones at regular intervals
several years apart. In such a case, before the second measurement is
available, increase in soil carbon would be estimated on the basis of
representative experiments or soil models. From the second measurement
onwards, the measurements would constitute the basis for determining the
existence of an increase in soil carbon and its magnitude.
:::
:::
